"Glad to see the boy's stopped trying to butt in. Where is he, anyway?"
"I don't know," said Aunt Petunia, unconcerned. "Not in the house."
"Watching the news..." he said scathingly. "I'd like to know what he's really up to. As if a
who the Prime Minister is! Anyway, it's not as if there'd be anything about his lot on our news-"
"Vernon, shh!" said Aunt Petunia. "The window's open!"
"Oh - yes - sorry, dear."
"Dudders out for tea?"
"At the Polkisses'," said Aunt Petunia fondly. "He's got so many little friends, he's so popular."
"Record numbers of stranded holiday makers fill air ports as the Spanish baggage-handlers' strike reaches its second week -"
"Give 'em a lifelong siesta, I would," snarled Uncle Vernon over the end of the newsreader's
baggage-handlers' strike was followed by news about the drought in the Southeast ("I hope he's
listening next door!" bellowed Uncle Vernon. "Him with his sprinklers on at three in the
morning!"), then a helicopter that had almost crashed in a field in Surrey, then a famous actress's
divorce from her famous husband ("As if we're interested in their sordid affairs," sniffed Aunt
Harry closed his eyes against the now blazing evening sky as the newsreader said, "-and finally,
Five Feathers in Barnsley, has learned to water ski! Mary Dorkins went to find out more."
"Put - it-away!" Uncle Vernon snarled into Harry's ear. "Now! Before- anyone - sees!"
"Get - off - me!" Harry gasped. For a few seconds they struggled, Harry pulling at his uncles
"Lovely evening!" shouted Uncle Vernon, waving at Mrs. Number Seven, who was glaring from behind her net curtains. "Did you hear that car backfire just now? Gave Petunia and me quite a turn!"
"What the devil do you mean by it, boy?" asked Uncle Vernon in a croaky voice that trembled
"What do I mean by what?" said Harry coldly. He kept looking left and right up the street, still
"Making a racket like a starting pistol right outside our -"
"I didn't make that noise," said Harry firmly.
"Why were you lurking under our window?"
"Yes - yes, good point, Petunia! What were you doing under our window, boy?"
"Listening to the news," said Harry in a resigned voice.
"Listening to the news! Again?"
"Well, it changes every day, you see," said Harry.
"Don't you be clever with me, boy! I want to know what you're really up to - and don't give me
any more of this listening to the news tosh! You know perfectly well that your lot -"
"Careful, Vernon!" breathed Aunt Petunia, and Uncle Vernon lowered his voice so that Harry
could barely hear him, "-that your lot don't get on our news!"
"That's all you know," said Harry.
The Dursleys goggled at him for a few seconds, then Aunt Petunia said, "You're a nasty little
liar. What are all those -" she, too, lowered her voice so that Harry had to lip-read the next word,
"- owls doing if they're not bringing you news?"
"Aha!" said Uncle Vernon in a triumphant whisper. "Get out of that one, boy! As if we didn't
know you get all your news from those pestilential birds!"
"The owls... aren't bringing me news," he said tonelessly.
"I don't believe it," said Aunt Petunia at once.
"No more do I," said Uncle Vernon forcefully.
"We know you're up to something funny," said Aunt Petunia.
"We're not stupid, you know," said Uncle Vernon.
"Well, that's news to me," said Harry, his temper rising, and before the Dursleys could call him
"... squealed like a pig, didn't he?" Malcolm was saying, to guffaws from the others.
"Nice right hook, Big D," said Piers.
"Same time tomorrow?" said Dudley.
"Round at my place, my parents will be out," said Gordon.
"See you then," said Dudley.
"Bye, Dud!"
"See ya, Big D!"
"Hey, Big D!"
"Oh," he grunted. "It's you."
"How long have you been 'Big D' then?" said Harry.
"Shut it," snarled Dudley, turning away.
"Cool name," said Harry, grinning and falling into step beside his cousin. "But you'll always be
'Ickle Diddykins' to me."
"I said, SHUT IT!" said Dudley, whose ham-like hands had curled into fists.
"Don't the boys know that's what your mum calls you?"
"Shut your face."
"You don't tell her to shut her face. What about 'Popkin' and 'Dinky Diddydums', can I use
them then?"
"So who've you been beating up tonight?" Harry asked, his grin fading. "Another ten-year-old? I
know you did Mark Evans two nights ago -"
"He was asking for it," snarled Dudley.
"Oh yeah?"
"He cheeked me."
"Yeah? Did he say you look like a pig that's been taught to walk on its hind legs? Cause that's
not cheek, Dud, that's true."
"Think you're a big man carrying that thing, don't you?" Dudley said after a few seconds.
"What thing?"
"That - that thing you are hiding."
"Not as stupid as you look, are you, Dud? But I s'pose, if you were, you wouldn't be able to walk and talk at the same time."
"You're not allowed," Dudley said at once. "I know you're not. You'd get expelled from that
freak school you go to."
"How d'you know they haven't changed the rules, Big D?"
"They haven't," said Dudley, though he didn't sound completely convinced.
"You haven't got the guts to take me on without that thing, have you?" Dudley snarled.
"Whereas you just need four mates behind you before you can beat up a ten year old. You know
that boxing title you keep banging on about? How old was your opponent? Seven? Eight?"
"He was sixteen, for your information," snarled Dudley, "and he was out cold for twenty minutes
that thing out -"
"Running to Daddy now, are you? Is his ickle boxing champ frightened of nasty Harry's wand?"
"Not this brave at night, are you?" sneered Dudley.
"This is night, Diddykins. That's what we call it when it goes all dark like this."
"I mean when you're in bed!" Dudley snarled.
"What d'you mean, I'm not brave when I'm in bed?" s aid Harry, completely nonplussed. "What
am I supposed to be frightened of, pillows or something?"
"I heard you last night," said Dudley breathlessly. "Talking in your sleep. Moaning."
"What d'you mean?" Harry said again, but there was a cold, plunging sensation in his stomach.
"'Don't kill Cedric! Don't kill Cedric!' Who's Cedric - your boyfriend?"
"I - you're lying," said Harry automatically. But his mouth had gone dry. He knew Dudley wasn't lying - how else would he know about Cedric?
"Dad! Help me, Dad! He's going to kill me, Dad! Boo hoo!"
"Shut up," said Harry quietly. "Shut up, Dudley, I'm warning you!"
"Come and help me, Dad! Mum, come and help me! He's killed Cedric! Dad, help me! He's
going to - don't you point that thing at me!"
"Don't ever talk about that again," Harry snarled. "D'you understand me?"
"Point that thing somewhere else!"
"I said, do you understand me?"
"Point it somewhere else!"
"DO YOU UNDERSTAND ME?"
"GET THAT THING AWAY FROM -"
"W-what are you d-doing? St-stop it!"
"I'm not doing anything! Shut up and don't move!"
"I c-can't see! I've g-gone blind! I -"
"I said shut up!"
"I'll t-tell Dad!" Dudley whimpered. "W-where are you? What are you d-do--?"
"Will you shut up?" Harry hissed, "I'm trying to lis --"
"C-cut it out! Stop doing it! I'll h-hit you, I swear I will!"
"Dudley, shut--"
"You moron, Dudley!" Harry yelled, his eyes watering with pain as he scrambled to his hands
"DUDLEY, COME BACK! YOU'RE RUNNING RIGHT AT IT!"
"DUDLEY, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! WHATEVER YOU DO, KEEP YOUR MOUTH
SHUT! Wand!" Harry muttered frantically, his hands flying over the ground like spiders.
"Where's - wand -come on -lumos!"
"Expecto patronum!"
"Expecto patronum!"
high-pitched laughter was growing louder and louder, and a voice spoke inside his head: "Bow
to death, Harry... it might even be painless... I would no t know... I have never died..."
"EXPECTO PATRONUM!"
"THIS WAY!" Harry shouted at the stag. Wheeling around, he sprinted down the alleyway,
holding the lit wand aloft. "DUDLEY? DUDLEY!"
"GET IT!" Harry bellowed, and with a rushing, roaring sound, the silver stag he had conjured
"Don't put it away idiot boy!" she shrieked. "What if there are more of them around? Oh, I'm
going to kill Mundungus Fletcher!"
"He left!" said Mrs. Figg, wringing her hands. "Left to see someone about a batch of cauldrons
him!"
"But -" The revelation that his batty old cat-obsessed neighbor knew what Dementors were was
almost as big a shock to Harry as meeting two of them down the alleyway. "You're - you're a
witch?"
"I'm a Squib, as Mundungus knows full well, so how on earth was I supposed to help you fight
off Dementors? He left you completely without cover when I'd warned him -"
"This Mundungus has been following me? Hang on - it was him! He Disapparated from the front
of my house!"
"Yes, yes, yes, but luckily I'd stationed Mr. Tibbies under a car just in case, and Mr. Tibbies
Dumbledore going to say? You!" she shrieked at Dudley, still supine on the alley floor. "Get your fat bottom off the ground, quick!"
"You know Dumbledore?" said Harry, staring at her.
"Of course I know Dumbledore, who doesn't know Dumbledore? But come on - I'll be no help if
they come back, I've never so much as transfigured a teabag."
"Get up, you useless lump, get up!"
"I'll do it." Harry took hold of Dudley's arm and h heaved. With an enormous effort he managed to hoist him to his feet. Dudley seemed to be on the point of fainting. His small eyes were rolling in their sockets and sweat was beading his face; the moment Harry let go of him he swayed
"Hurry up!" said Mrs. Figg hysterically.
"Keep your wand out," she told Harry, as they entered Wisteria Walk. "Never mind the Statute of Secrecy now, there's going to be hell to pay anyway, we might as well be hanged for a dragon as an egg. Talk about the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery... this was exactly what
don't put your wand away, boy, don't I keep telling you I'm no use?"
"Why didn't you tell me you're a Squib, Mrs. Figg?" asked Harry, panting with the effort to keep
walking. "All those times I came round your house - why didn't you say anything?"
"Dumbledore's orders. I was to keep an eye on you but not say anything, you were too young.
come if they'd thought you enjoyed it. It wasn't easy, you know... but oh my word," she said
tragically, wringing her hands once more, "when Dumbledore hears about this - how could
going to tell Dumbledore what's happened? I can't Apparate."
"I've got an owl, you can borrow her." Harry groaned, wondering whether his spine was going to
"Harry, you don't understand! Dumbledore will need to act as quickly as possible, the Ministry
have their own ways of detecting underage magic, they'll know already, you mark my words."
"But I was getting rid of Dementors, I had to use magic - they're going to be more worried about
what Dementors were doing floating around Wisteria Walk, surely?"
"Oh, my dear, I wish it were so, but I'm afraid - MUNDUNGUS FLETCHER, I AM GOING TO
KILL YOU!"
"S'up, Figgy?" he said, staring from Mrs. Figg to Harry and Dudley. "What 'appened to staying
undercover?"
"I'll give you undercover!" cried Mrs. Figg. "Dementors, you useless, skiving sneak thief!"
"Dementors?" repeated Mundungus, aghast. "Dementors, 'ere?"
"Yes, here, you worthless pile of bat droppings, here!" shrieked Mrs. Figg. "Dementors attacking
the boy on your watch!"
"Blimey," said Mundungus weakly, looking from Mrs. Figg to Harry, and back again. "Blimey, I
-"
"And you off buying stolen cauldrons! Didn't I tell you not to go? Didn't I!"
"I - well, I -" Mundungus looked deeply uncomfortable. "It -- it was a very good business
opportunity, see -"
"Ouch - gerroff - gerroff, you mad old bat! Someone's gotta tell Dumbledore!"
"Yes - they - have!" yelled Mrs. Figg, swinging the bag of cat food at every bit of Mundungus
she could reach. "And - it - had - better - be - you - and - you - can - tell - him - why - you -
weren't - there - to - help!"
"Keep your 'airnet on!" said Mundungus, his arms over his head, cowering. "I'm going, I'm
going!"
"I hope Dumbledore murders him!" said Mrs. Figg furiously. "Now come on, Harry, what are
you waiting for?"
"I'll take you to the door," said Mrs. Figg, as they turned into Privet Drive. "Just in case there are
no good crying over spilt potion, I suppose... but the cat's among the pixies now."
"So," Harry panted, "Dumbledore's... been having... me followed?"
"Of course he has," said Mrs. Figg impatiently. "Did you expect him to let you wander around on your own after what happened in June? Good Lord, boy, they told me you were intelligent...
right... get inside and stay there," she said, as they reached number four. "I expect someone will
be in touch with you soon enough."
"What are you going to do?" asked Harry quickly.
"I'm going straight home," said Mrs. Figg, staring around the dark street and shuddering. "I'll
need to wait for more instructions. Just stay in the house. Goodnight."
"Hang on, don't go yet! I want to know -"
"Wait!" Harry shouted after her. He had a million questions to ask anyone who was in contact
"Diddy! About time too, I was getting quite - quite -Diddy, what's the matter!"
"DIDDY! Diddy, what's the matter with you? Vernon? VERNON!"
"He's ill, Vernon!"
"What is it, son? What's happened? Did Mrs. Polkiss give you something foreign for tea?"
"Why are you all covered in dirt, darling? Have you been lying on the ground?"
"Hang on - you haven't been mugged, have you, son?"
"Phone the police, Vernon! Phone the police! Diddy, darling, speak to Mummy! What did they
do to you?"
"Who did it, son? Give us names. We'll get them, don't worry."
"Shh! He's trying to say something, Vernon! What is it, Diddy? Tell Mummy!"
"Him."
"BOY! COME HERE!"
"What have you done to my son?" he said in a menacing growl.
"Nothing," said Harry, knowing perfectly well that Uncle Vernon wouldn't believe him.
"What did he do to you, Diddy?" Aunt Petunia said in a quavering voice, now sponging sick from the front of Dudley's leather jacket. "Was it - was it you-know-what, darling? Did he use - his thing?"
"I didn't!" Harry said sharply, as Aunt Petunia let out a wail and Uncle Vernon raised his fists. "I didn't do anything to him, it wasn't me, it was -"
"OWLS!" bellowed Uncle Vernon, the well-worn vein in his temple pulsing angrily as he
slammed the kitchen window shut. "OWLS AGAIN! I WILL NOT HAVE ANY MORE OWLS
IN MY HOUSE!"
"Where d'you think you're going?" yelled Uncle Vernon. When Harry didn't reply, he pounded
across the kitchen to block the doorway into the hall. "I haven't finished with you, boy!"
"Get out of the way," said Harry quietly.
"You're going to stay here and explain how my son-"
"If you don't get out of the way I'm going to jinx you," said Harry, raising the wand.
"You can't pull that one on me!" snarled Uncle Vernon. "I know you're not allowed to use it
outside that madhouse you call a school!"
"The madhouse has chucked me out," said Harry. "So I can do whatever I like. You've got three
seconds. One - two -"
"Right," Harry said, "I've changed my mind, I'm staying." He flung himself down at the kitchen
"Who are all these ruddy owls from?" he growled.
"The first one was from the Ministry of Magic, expelling me," said Harry calmly. He was
start raging and bellowing. "The second one was from my friend Ron's dad, who works at the
Ministry."
"Ministry of Magic?" bellowed Uncle Vernon. "People like you in government! Oh, this explains everything, everything, no wonder the country's going to the dogs."
When Harry did not respond, Uncle Vernon glared at him, then spat out, "And why have you
been expelled?"
"Because I did magic."
"AHA!" roared Uncle Vernon, slamming his fist down on top of the fridge, which sprang open;
several of Dudley's low-fat snacks toppled out and burst on the floor. "So you admit it! What did
you do to Dudley?"
"Nothing," said Harry, slightly less calmly. "That wasn't me -"
"Was," muttered Dudley unexpectedly, and Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia instantly made
"Go on, son," said Uncle Vernon, "what did he do?"
"Tell us, darling," whispered Aunt Petunia.
"Pointed his wand at me," Dudley mumbled.
"Yeah, I did, but I didn't use -" Harry began angrily, but -
"SHUT UP!" roared Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia in unison.
"Go on, son," repeated Uncle Vernon, moustache blowing about furiously.
"All went dark," Dudley said hoarsely, shuddering. "Everything dark. And then I h-heard...
things. Inside m-my head."
"What sort of things did you hear, Popkin?" breathed Aunt Petunia, very white-faced and with
"How come you fell over, son?" said Uncle Vernon, in an unnaturally quiet voice, the kind of
"T-tripped," said Dudley shakily. "And then -"
"Horrible," croaked Dudley. "Cold. Really cold."
"Okay," said Uncle Vernon, in a voice of forced calm, while Aunt Petunia laid an anxious hand on Dudley's forehead to feel his temperature. "What happened then, Dudders?"
"Felt... felt... felt... as if... as if..."
"As if you'd never be happy again," Harry supplied dully.
"Yes," Dudley whispered, still trembling.
"So!" said Uncle Vernon, voice restored to full and considerable volume as he straightened up.
"You put some crackpot spell on my son so he'd hear voices and believe he was - was doomed to
misery, or something, did you?"
"How many times do I have to tell you?" said Harry, temper and voice both rising. "It wasn't me! It was a couple of Dementors!"
"A couple of - what's this codswallop?"
"De - men - tors," said Harry slowly and clearly. "Two of them."
"And what the ruddy hell are Dementors?"
"They guard the wizard prison, Azkaban," said Aunt Petunia.
"How d'you know that?" he asked her, astonished.
"I heard - that awful boy - telling her about them - years ago," she said jerkily.
"If you mean my mum and dad, why don't you use their names?" said Harry loudly, but Aunt
struggling to remember how to talk, opened it for a third time and croaked, "So - so - they - er -
they - er - they actually exist, do they - er - Dementy-whatsits?"
"Enough - effing - owls," muttered Uncle Vernon distractedly, stomping over to the window and
"Well?" said Uncle Vernon, recalling Harry to his surroundings. "What now? Have they
sentenced you to anything? Do your lot have the death penalty?" he added as a hopeful
"I've got to go to a hearing," said Harry.
"And they'll sentence you there?"
"I suppose so."
"I won't give up hope, then," said Uncle Vernon nastily.
"Well, if that's all," said Harry, getting to his feet. He was desperate to be alone, to think, perhaps to send a letter to Ron, Hermione or Sirius.
"NO, IT RUDDY WELL IS NOT ALL!" bellowed Uncle Vernon. "SIT BACK DOWN!"
"What now?" said Harry impatiently.
"DUDLEY!" roared Uncle Vernon. "I want to know exactly what happened to my son!"
"FINE!" yelled Harry, and in his temper, red and gold sparks shot out of the end of his wand, still clutched in his hand. All three Dursleys flinched, looking terrified.
"Dudley and I were in the alleyway between Magnolia Crescent and Wisteria Walk," said Harry,
speaking fast, fighting to control his temper. "Dudley thought he'd be smart with me, I pulled out
my wand but didn't use it. Then two Dementors turned up --"
"But what ARE Dementoids?" asked Uncle Vernon furiously. "What do they DO?"
"I told you - they suck all the happiness out of you," said Harry, "and if they get the chance, they
"Kiss you?" said Uncle Vernon, his eyes popping slightly. "Kiss you?"
"It's what they call it when they suck the soul out of your mouth."
"His soul? They didn't take - he's still got his -"
"Of course they didn't get his soul, you'd know if they had," said Harry, exasperated.
"Fought 'em off, did you, son?" said Uncle Vernon loudly, with the appearance of a man
struggling to bring the conversation back on to a plane he understood. "Gave 'em the old one-two, did you?"
"You can't give a Dementor the old one-two," said Harry through clenched teeth.
"Why's he all right, then?" blustered Uncle Vernon. "Why isn't he all empty, then?"
"Because I used the Patronus -"
"FOR GOD'S SAKE!" roared Uncle Vernon, pulling great clumps of hair out of his moustache,
something he hadn't been driven to do in a long time. "I WILL NOT HAVE OWLS HERE, I
WILL NOT TOLERATE THIS, I TELL YOU!"
"...A peck, I mean, pack of owls shooting in and out of my house. I won't have it, boy, I won't-"
"I can't stop the owls coming," Harry snapped, crushing Sirius's letter in his fist.
"I want the truth about what happened tonight!" bar ked Uncle Vernon. "If it was Demenders who hurt Dudley, how come you've been expelled? You did you-know-what, you've admitted it!"
"I did the Patronus Charm to get rid of the Dementors," he said, forcing himself to remain calm.
"It's the only thing that works against them."
"But what were Dementoids doing in Little Whinging?" said Uncle Vernon in an outraged tone.
"Couldn't tell you," said Harry wearily. "No idea."
"It's you," said Uncle Vernon forcefully. "It's go t something to do with you, boy, I know it. Why else would they turn up here? Why else would they be down that alleyway? You've got to be the only - the only -" Evidently, he couldn't bring himself to say the word 'wizard' "the only you know-what for miles."
"I don't know why they were here."
"These Demembers guard some weirdo's prison?" asked Uncle Vernon, lumbering along in the
"Yes," said Harry.
"Oho! They were coming to arrest you!" said Uncle Vernon, with the triumphant air of a man
reaching an unassailable conclusion. "That's it, isn't it, boy? You're on the run from the law!"
"Of course I'm not," said Harry, shaking his head as though to scare off a fly, his mind racing
"Then why -?"
"He must have sent them," said Harry quietly, more to himself than to Uncle Vernon.
"What's that? Who must have sent them?"
"Lord Voldemort," said Harry.
"Lord - hang on," said Uncle Vernon, his face screwed up, a look of dawning comprehension
coming into his piggy eyes. "I've heard that name... that was the one who --"
"Murdered my parents, yes," Harry said dully.
"But he's gone," said Uncle Vernon impatiently, without the slightest sign that the murder of
Harry's parents might be a painful topic. "That giant bloke said so. He's gone."
"He's back," said Harry heavily.
"Back?" whispered Aunt Petunia.
"Yes," Harry said, talking directly to Aunt Petunia now. "He came back a month ago. I saw him."
"Hang on," said Uncle Vernon, looking from his wife to Harry and back again, apparently dazed
"Hang on. This Lord Voldything's back, you say."
"Yes."
"The one who murdered your parents."
"Yes."
"And now he's sending Dismembers after you?"
"Looks like it," said Harry.
"I see," said Uncle Vernon, looking from his white - faced wife to Harry and hitching up his
trousers. He seemed to be swelling, his great purple face stretching before Harry's eyes. "Well,
that settles it," he said, his shirt front straining as he inflated himself, "you can get out of this
house, boy!"
"What?" said Harry.
"You heard me - OUT!" Uncle Vernon bellowed, and even Aunt Petunia and Dudley jumped.
"OUT! OUT! I should've done this years ago! Owls treating the place like a rest home, puddings
down on us. If you're going the same way as your useless parents, I've had it! OUT!"
"You heard me!" said Uncle Vernon, bending forward now, his massive purple face coming so
close to Harry's, he actually felt flecks of spit hit his face. "Get going! You were all keen to leave half an hour ago! I'm right behind you! Get out and never darken our doorstep again! Why we ever kept you in the first place, I don't know, Marge was right, it should have been the
enough - owls!"
"You can open it if you like," said Harry, "but I'll hear what it says anyway. That's a Howler."
"Let go of it, Petunia!" roared Uncle Vernon. "Don't touch it, it could be dangerous!"
"It's addressed to me," said Aunt Petunia in a shaking voice. "It's addressed to me, Vernon, look! Mrs. Petunia Dursley, The Kitchen, Number Four, Privet Drive -"
"Open it!' Harry urged her. "Get it over with! It'll happen anyway."
"No."
"What is this?" Uncle Vernon said hoarsely. "What - I don't -Petunia?"
"Petunia, dear?" said Uncle Vernon timidly. "P-Petunia?"
"The boy - the boy will have to stay, Vernon," she said weakly.
"W-what?"
"He stays," she said. She was not looking at Harry. She got to her feet again.
"He... but Petunia..."
"If we throw him out, the neighbors will talk," she said. She was rapidly regaining her usual
brisk, snappish manner, though she was still very pale. "They'll ask awkward questions, they'll
want to know where he's gone. We'll have to keep him."
"But Petunia, dear -"
Aunt Petunia ignored him. She turned to Harry. "You're to stay in your room," she said. "You're
not to leave the house. Now get to bed."
"Who was that Howler from?"
"Don't ask questions," Aunt Petunia snapped.
"Are you in touch with wizards?"
"I told you to get to bed!"
"What did it mean? Remember the last what?"
"Go to bed!"
"How come -?"
"YOU HEARD YOUR AUNT, NOW GET TO BED!"
"About time!" Harry snarled, as she landed lightly on top of her cage. "You can put that down,
I've got work for you!"
"Come here," said Harry, picking up the three small rolls of parchment and a leather thong and
tying the scrolls to her scaly leg. "Take these straight to Sirius, Ron and Hermione and don't come back here without good long replies. Keep pecking them till they've written decent-length
answers if you've got to. Understand?"
"Get going, then," said Harry.
"We're going out," he said.
"Sorry?"
"We - that is to say, your aunt, Dudley and I - are going out."
"Fine," said Harry dully, looking back at the ceiling.
"You are not to leave your bedroom while we are away."
"Okay."
"You are not to touch the television, the stereo, or any of our possessions."
"Right."
"You are not to steal food from the fridge."
"Okay."
"I am going to lock your door."
"You do that."
"Lower your wand, boy, before you take someone's eye out," said a low, growling voice.
"Professor Moody?" he said uncertainly.
"I don't know so much about 'Professor'," growled the voice, "never got round to much teaching, did I? Get down here, we want to see you properly."
"It's all right, Harry. We've come to take you away."
"P-Professor Lupin?" he said disbelievingly. "Is that you?"
"Why are we all standing in the dark?" said a third voice, this one completely unfamiliar, a
woman's. "Lumos."
"Oooh, he looks just like I thought he would," said the witch who was holding her lit wand aloft.
spiky hair that was a violent shade of violet. "Wotcher, Harry!"
"Yeah, I see what you mean, Remus," said a bald black wizard standing furthest back - he had a
deep, slow voice and wore a single gold hoop in his ear - "he looks exactly like James."
"Except the eyes," said a wheezy-voiced, silver-haired wizard at the back. "Lily's eyes."
doors and the back of Moody's own head. "Are you quite sure it's him, Lupin?" he growled. "It'd be a nice lookout if we bring back some Death Eater impersonating him. We ought to ask him something only the real Potter would know. Unless anyone brought any Veritaserum?"
"Harry, what form does your Patronus take?" Lupin asked.
"A stag," said Harry nervously.
"That's him, Mad-Eye," said Lupin.
"Don't put your wand there, boy!" roared Moody. "What if it ignited? Better wizards than you
have lost buttocks, you know!"
"Who d'you know who's lost a buttock?" the violet-haired woman asked Mad-Eye interestedly.
"Never you mind, you just keep your wand out of your back pocket!" growled Mad-Eye.
"Elementary wand-safety, nobody bothers about it any more." He stumped off towards the
kitchen. "And I saw that," he added irritably, as t he woman rolled her eyes towards the ceiling.
"How are you?" he asked, looking closely at Harry.
"F-fine..."
"I'm - you're really lucky the Dursleys are out..." he mumbled.
"Lucky, ha!" said the violet-haired woman. "It was me who lured them out of the way. Sent a
they are."
"We are leaving, aren't we?" he asked. "Soon?"
"Almost at once," said Lupin, "we're just waiting for the all-clear."
"Where are we going? The Burrow?" Harry asked hopefully.
"Not The Burrow, no," said Lupin, motioning Harry towards the kitchen; the little knot of
wizards followed, all still eyeing Harry curiously. "Too risky. We've set up Headquarters
somewhere undetectable. It's taken a while..."
"This is Alastor Moody, Harry" Lupin continued, pointing towards Moody.
"Yeah, I know," said Harry uncomfortably. It felt odd to be introduced to somebody he'd thought he'd known for a year.
"And this is Nymphadora -"
"Don't call me Nymphadora, Remus," said the young witch with a shudder, "it's Tonks."
"Nymphadora Tonks, who prefers to be known by her surname only," finished Lupin.
"So would you if your fool of a mother had called you Nymphadora," muttered Tonks.
"And this is Kingsley Shacklebolt." He indicated the tall black wizard, who bowed. "Elphias
Doge." The wheezy-voiced wizard nodded. "Dedalus Diggle -"
"We've met before," squeaked the excitable Diggle, dropping his violet-colored top hat.
"Emmeline Vance." A stately-looking witch in an emerald green shawl inclined her head.
"Sturgis Podmore." A square-jawed wizard with thick straw-colored hair winked. "And Hestia
Jones." A pink-cheeked, black-haired witch waved form next to the toaster.
"A surprising number of people volunteered to come and get you," said Lupin, as though he had
"Yeah, well, the more the better," said Moody darkly. "We're your guard, Potter."
"We're just waiting for the signal to tell us it's safe to set off," said Lupin, glancing out of the
kitchen window. "We've got about fifteen minutes."
"Very clean, aren't they, these Muggles?" said the witch called Tonks, who was looking around
the kitchen with great interest. "My dad's Muggle-born and he's a right old slob. I suppose it
varies, just as it does with wizards?"
"Er - yeah," said Harry. "Look -" he turned back to Lupin, "what's going on, I haven't heard
anything from anyone, what's Vol--?"
again and Moody growled, "Shut up!"
"What?" said Harry.
"We're not discussing anything here, it's too risky," said Moody, turning his normal eye on
Harry. His magical eye remained focused on the ceiling. "Damn it," he added angrily, putting a
hand up to the magical eye, "it keeps getting stuck - ever since that scum wore it."
"Mad-Eye, you do know that's disgusting, don't you?" said Tonks conversationally.
"Get me a glass of water, would you, Harry," requested Moody.
"Cheers," said Moody, when Harry handed him the glass. He dropped the magical eyeball into
the water and prodded it up and down; the eye whizzed around, staring at them all in turn. "I
want three hundred and sixty degrees visibility on the return journey."
"How're we getting - wherever we're going?" Harry asked.
"Brooms," said Lupin. "Only way. You're too young to Apparate, they'll be watching the Floo
Network and it's more than our life's worth to set up an unauthorized Portkey."
"Remus says you're a good flier," said Kingsley Shacklebolt in his deep voice.
"He's excellent," said Lupin, who was checking his watch. "Anyway, you'd better go and get
packed, Harry, we want to be ready to go when the signal comes."
"I'll come and help you," said Tonks brightly.
"Funny place," she said. "It's a bit too clean, d'you know what I mean? Bit unnatural. Oh, this is
better," she added, as they entered Harry's bedroom and he turned on the light.
"You know, I don't think violet's really my color," she said pensively, tugging at a lock of spiky hair. "D'you think it makes me look a bit peaky?"
"Er -" said Harry, looking up at her over the top of Quidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland.
"Yeah, it does," said Tonks decisively. She screwed up her eyes in a strained expression as
"How did you do that?" said Harry, gaping at her as she opened her eyes again.
"I'm a Metamorphmagus," she said, looking back at her reflection and turning her head so that
she could see her hair from all directions. "It means I can change my appearance at will," she
added, spotting Harry's puzzled expression in the mirror behind her. "I was born one. I got top
marks in Concealment and Disguise during Auror training without any study at all, it was great."
"You're an Auror?" said Harry, impressed. Being a Dark-wizard-catcher was the only career he'd ever considered after Hogwarts.
"Yeah," said Tonks, looking proud. "Kingsley is as well, he's a bit higher up than me, though. I
me break that plate when we arrived downstairs?"
"Can you learn how to be a Metamorphmagus?" Harry asked her, straightening up, completely
"Bet you wouldn't mind hiding that scar sometimes, eh?"
"No, I wouldn't mind," Harry mumbled, turning away. He did not like people staring at his scar.
"Well, you'll have to learn the hard way, I'm afraid," said Tonks. "Metamorphmagi are really
appearance. But we've got to get going, Harry, we're supposed to be packing," she added
"Oh -- yeah," said Harry, grabbing a few more books.
"Don't be stupid, it'll be much quicker if I - pack!" cried Tonks, waving her wand in a long,
"It's not very neat," said Tonks, walking over to t he trunk and looking down at the jumble inside.
"My mums got this knack of getting stuff to fit itself in neatly - she even gets the socks to fold
themselves - but I've never mastered how she does it - it's a kind of flick -" She flicked her wand
"Ah, well," said Tonks, slamming the trunk's lid shut, "at least it's all in. That could do with a bit of cleaning, too." She pointed her wand at Hedwig's cage. "Scourgify." A few feathers and
droppings vanished. "Well, that's a bit better - I've never quite got the hang of these householdy
sort of spells. Right - got everything? Cauldron? Broom? Wow! - A Firebolt!"
"And I'm still riding a Comet Two Sixty" said Tonks enviously. "Ah well... wand still in your
jeans? Both buttocks still on? Okay, let's go. Locomotor trunk."
"Excellent," said Lupin, looking up as Tonks and Harry entered. "We've got about a minute, I
your aunt and uncle not to worry -"
"They won't," said Harry.
"- that you're safe -"
"That'll just depress them."
"- and you'll see them next summer."
"Do I have to?"
"Come here, boy," said Moody gruffly, beckoning Harry towards him with his wand. "I need to
Disillusion you."
"You need to what?" said Harry nervously.
"Disillusionment Charm," said Moody, raising his wand. "Lupin says you've got an Invisibility
"Nice one, Mad-Eye," said Tonks appreciatively, staring at Harry's midriff.
"Come on," said Moody, unlocking the back door with his wand.
"Clear night," grunted Moody, his magical eye scanning the heavens. "Could've done with a bit
more cloud cover. Right, you," he barked at Harry," we're going to be flying in close formation.
"Is that likely?" Harry asked apprehensively, but Moody ignored him.
"- the others keep flying, don't stop, don't break ranks. If they take out all of us and you survive,
Harry, the rear guard are standing by to take over; keep flying east and they'll join you."
"Stop being so cheerful, Mad-Eye, he'll think we're not taking this seriously" said Tonks, as she
"I'm just telling the boy the plan," growled Moody. "Our jobs to deliver him safely to
Headquarters and if we die in the attempt -"
"No one's going to die," said Kingsley Shacklebolt in his deep, calming voice.
"Mount your brooms, that's the first signal!" said Lupin sharply pointing into the sky.
"Second signal, let's go!" said Lupin loudly as more sparks, green this time, exploded high above them.
"Hard left, hard left, there's a Muggle looking up!" shouted Moody from behind him. Tonks
swerved and Harry followed her, watching his trunk swinging wildly beneath her broom. "We
need more height... give it another quarter of a mile!"
"Bearing south!" shouted Mad-Eye. "'Town ahead!"
"Bear southeast and keep climbing, there's some low cloud ahead we can lose ourselves in!"
"We're not going through clouds!" shouted Tonks angrily, "we'll get soaked, Mad-Eye!"
"Turning southwest!" yelled Moody "We want to avoid the motorway!"
"We ought to double back for a bit, just to make sure we're not being followed!" Moody shouted.
"ARE YOU MAD, MAD-EYE"' Tonks screamed from the front. "We're all frozen to our
nearly there now!"
"Time to start the descent!" came Lupin's voice. "Follow Tonks, Harry!"
"Here we go!" called Tonks, and a few seconds later she had landed.
"Where are we?" Harry asked, but Lupin said quietly, "In a minute."
"Got it," he muttered, raising what looked like a silver cigarette lighter into the air and clicking it.
"Borrowed it from Dumbledore," growled Moody, pocketing the Put-Outer. "That'll take care of
any Muggles looking out of the window, see? Now come on, quick."
"Here," Moody muttered, thrusting a piece of parchment towards Harry's Disillusioned hand and
holding his lit wand close to it, so as to illuminate the writing. "Read quickly and memories."
"What's the Order of the -?" Harry began.
"Not here, boy!" snarled Moody. "Wait till we're inside!"
"But where's -?"
"Think about what you've just memorized," said Lupin quietly.
"Come on, hurry," growled Moody, prodding Harry in the back.
"Get in quick, Harry," Lupin whispered, "but don't go far inside and don't touch anything."
"Here -"
"Now stay still, everyone, while I give us a bit of light in here," Moody whispered.
"Oh, Harry, it's lovely to see you!" she whispered, pulling him into a rib-cracking hug before
holding him at arm's length and examining him critically. "You're looking peaky; you need
feeding up, but you'll have to wait a bit for dinner, I'm afraid."
She turned to the gang of wizards behind him and whispered urgently, "He's just arrived, the
meetings started."
"No, Harry, the meetings only for members of the Order. Ron and Hermione are upstairs, you
the hall," she added in an urgent whisper.
"Why?"
"I don't want anything to wake up."
"What d'you -?"
"I'll explain later, I've got to hurry, I'm supposed to be at the meeting - I'll just show you where
you're sleeping."
"Mrs. Weasley, why -?"
"Ron and Hermione will explain everything, dear, I've really got to dash," Mrs. Weasley
whispered distractedly. "There -" they had reached the second landing, "- you're the door on the
right. I'll call you when it's over."
"HARRY! Ron, he's here, Harry's here! We didn't hear you arrive! Oh, how are you? Are you all right? Have you been furious with us? I bet you have, I know our letters were useless - but we
in life-threatening situations -"
"Let him breathe, Hermione," said Ron, grinning as he closed the door behind Harry. He seemed
"Hedwig!"
"She's been in a right state," said Ron. "Pecked us half to death when she brought your last
letters, look at this -"
"Oh, yeah," Harry said. "Sorry about that, but I wanted answers, you know -"
"We wanted to give them to you, mate," said Ron. "Hermione was going spare, she kept saying
made us -"
"- swear not to tell me," said Harry. "Yeah, Hermione's already said."
"He seemed to think it was best," said Hermione rather breathlessly. "Dumbledore, I mean."
"Right," said Harry. He noticed that her hands, too, bore the marks of Hedwigs beak and found
"I think he thought you were safest with the Muggles -" Ron began.
"Yeah?" said Harry, raising his eyebrows. "Have either of you been attacked by Dementors this
summer?"
"Well, no-but that's why he's had people from the Order of the Phoenix tailing you all the time-"
"Didn't work that well, though, did it?" said Harry, doing his utmost to keep his voice even.
"Had to look after myself after all, didn't I?"
"He was so angry," said Hermione, in an almost awestruck voice. "Dumbledore. We saw him.
When he found out Mundungus had left before his shift had ended. He was scary."
"Well, I'm glad he left," Harry said coldly. "If he hadn't, I wouldn't have done magic and
Dumbledore would probably have left me at Privet Drive all summer."
"Aren't you... aren't you worried about the Ministry of Magic hearing?" said Hermione quietly.
"No," Harry lied defiantly. He walked away from them, looking around, with Hedwig nestled
"So why's Dumbledore been so keen to keep me in the dark?" Harry asked, still trying hard to
keep his voice casual. "Did you - er - bother to ask him at all?"
"We told Dumbledore we wanted to tell you what was going on," said Ron. "We did, mate. But
be intercepted."
"He could still've kept me informed if he'd wanted to," Harry said shortly. "You're not telling me he doesn't know ways to send messages without owls."
Hermione glanced at Ron and then said, "I thought that, too. But he didn't want you to
know anything."
"Maybe he thinks I can't be trusted," said Harry, watching their expressions.
"Don't be thick," said Ron, looking highly disconcerted.
"Or that I can't take care of myself."
"Of course he doesn't think that!" said Hermione anxiously.
"So how come I have to stay at the Dursleys' while you two get to join in everything that's going
on here?" said Harry, the words tumbling over one another in a rush, his voice growing louder
with every word. "How come you two are allowed to know everything that's going on?"
"We're not!" Ron interrupted. "Mum won't let us near the meetings, she says we're too young -"
"SO YOU HAVEN'T BEEN IN THE MEETINGS, BIG DEAL! YOU'VE STILL BEEN HERE,
DEMENTORS?"
"WHO HAD TO GET PAST DRAGONS AND SPHINXES AND EVERY OTHER FOUL
HIM? ME!"
"BUT WHY SHOULD I KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON? WHY SHOULD ANYONE BOTHER
TO TELL ME WHAT'S BEEN HAPPENING?"
"Harry, we wanted to tell you, we really did -" Hermione began.
"CAN'T'VE WANTED TO THAT MUCH, CAN YOU, OR YOU'D HAVE SENT ME AN
OWL, BUT DUMBLEDORE MADEYOU SWEAR-"
"Well, he did -"
"FOUR WEEKS I'VE BEEN STUCK IN PRIVET DRIVE, NICKING PAPERS OUT OF BINS
TO TRY AND FIND OUT WHAT'S BEEN GOING ON -"
"We wanted to -"
"I SUPPOSE YOU'VE BEEN HAVING A REAL LAUGH, HAVEN'T YOU, ALL HOLED UP
HERE TOGETHER -"
"No, honest -"
"Harry we're really sorry!" said Hermione desperately, her eyes now sparkling with tears. "You're absolutely right, Harry - I'd be furious if it was me!"
"What is this place, anyway?" he shot at Ron and Hermione.
"Headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix," said Ron at once.
"Is anyone going to bother telling me what the Order of the Phoenix -?"
"It's a secret society," said Hermione quickly. "Dumbledore's in charge, he founded it. It's the
people who fought against You-Know-Who last time."
"Who's in it?" said Harry, coming to a halt with his hands in his pockets.
"Quite a few people -"
"We've met about twenty of them," said Ron, "but we think there are more."
"Well?" he demanded, looking from one to the other.
"Er," said Ron. "Well what?"
"Voldemort!" said Harry furiously, and both Ron and Hermione winced. "What's happening?
What's he up to? Where is he? What are we doing to stop him?"
"We've told you, the Order don't let us in on their meetings," said Hermione nervously. "So we
don't know the details - but we've got a general idea," she added hastily, seeing the look on
"Fred and George have invented Extendable Ears, see," said Ron. "They're really useful."
"Extendable -?"
"Ears, yeah. Only we've had to stop using them lately because Mum found out and went berserk.
known Death Eaters, keeping tabs on them, you know -"
"Some of them are working on recruiting more people to the Order -" said Hermione.
"And some of them are standing guard over something," said Ron. "They're always talking about guard duty."
"Couldn't have been me, could it?" said Harry sarcastically.
"Oh, yeah," said Ron, with a look of dawning comprehension.
"So, what have you two been doing, if you're not allowed in meetings?" he demanded. "You said you'd been busy"'
"We have," said Hermione quickly. "We've been decontaminating this house, it's been empty for ages and stuff's been breeding in here. We've managed to clean out the kitchen, most of the
bedrooms and I think we're doing the drawing room tomo-"
"Stop doing that!" Hermione said weakly to the twins, who were as vividly red-haired as Ron,
"Hello, Harry," said George, beaming at him. "We thought we heard your dulcet tones."
"You don't want to bottle up your anger like that, Harry, let it all out," said Fred, also beaming.
"There might be a couple of people fifty miles away who didn't hear you."
"You two passed your Apparation tests, then?" asked Harry grumpily.
"With distinction," said Fred, who was holding what looked like a piece of very long, flesh colored string.
"It would have taken you about thirty seconds longer to walk down the stairs," said Ron.
"Time is Galleons, little brother" said Fred. "Anyway, Harry, you're interfering with reception.
Extendable Ears," he added in response to Harry's raised eyebrows, and held up the string which
Harry now saw was trailing out on to the landing. "We're trying to hear what's going on
downstairs."
"You want to be careful," said Ron, staring at the Ear, "if Mum sees one of them again..."
"It's worth the risk, that's a major meeting they're having," said Fred.
"Oh, hello, Harry!" said Ron's younger sister, Ginny, brightly. "I thought I heard your voice."
Turning to Fred and George, she said, "It's no-go with the Extendable Ears, she's gone and put
an Imperturbable Charm on the kitchen door."
"How d'you know?" said George, looking crestfallen.
"Tonks told me how to find out," said Ginny. "You just chuck stuff at the door and if it can't
get under the gap."
"Shame. I really fancied finding out what old Snape's been up to."
"Snape!" said Harry quickly. "Is he here?"
"Yeah," said George, carefully closing the door and sitting down on one of the beds; Fred and
Ginny followed. "Giving a report. Top secret."
"Git," said Fred idly.
"He's on our side now," said Hermione reprovingly.
Ron snorted. "Doesn't stop him being a git. The way he looks at us when he sees us."
"Bill doesn't like him, either," said Ginny, as though that settled the matter.
"Is Bill here?" he asked. "I thought he was working in Egypt?"
"He applied for a desk job so he could come home and work for the Order," said Fred. "He says
he misses the tombs, but;" he smirked, "there are compensations."
"What d'you mean?"
"Remember old Fleur Delacour?" said George. "She's got a job at Gringotts to eempwve 'er
Eeenglish -"
"And Bill's been giving her a lot of private lessons," sniggered Fred.
"Charlie's in the Order, too," said George, "but he's still in Romania. Dumbledore wants as many foreign wizards brought in as possible, so Charlie's trying to make contacts on his days off."
"Couldn't Percy do that?" Harry asked. The last he had heard, the third Weasley brother was
"Whatever you do, don't mention Percy in front of Mum and Dad," Ron told Harry in a tense
"Why not?"
"Because every time Percy's name's mentioned, Dad breaks whatever he's holding and Mum
starts crying," Fred said.
"It's been awful," said Ginny sadly.
"I think we're well shut of him," said George, with an uncharacteristically ugly look on his face.
"What's happened?" Harry said.
"Percy and Dad had a row," said Fred. "I've never seen Dad row with anyone like that. It's
normally Mum who shouts."
"It was the first week back after term ended," said Ron. "We were about to come and join the
Order. Percy came home and told us he'd been promoted."
"You're kidding?" said Harry.
"Yeah, we were all surprised," said George, "because Percy got into a load of trouble about
wasn't going to complain."
"So how come they promoted him?"
"That's exactly what we wondered," said Ron, who see med very keen to keep normal
conversation going now that Harry had stopped yelling. "He came home really pleased with
Junior Assistant to the Minister. He expected Dad to be all impressed, I think."
"Only Dad wasn't," said Fred grimly.
"Why not?" said Harry.
"Well, apparently Fudge has been storming round the Ministry checking that nobody's having
any contact with Dumbledore," said George.
"Dumbledore's name is mud with the Ministry these days, see," said Fred. "They all think he's
just making trouble saying You-Know-Who's back."
"Dad says Fudge has made it clear that anyone who's in league with Dumbledore can clear out
their desks," said George.
"Trouble is, Fudge suspects Dad, he knows he's friendly with Dumbledore, and he's always
thought Dad's a bit of a weirdo because of his Muggle obsession."
"But what's that got to do with Percy?" asked Harry, confused.
"I'm coming to that. Dad reckons Fudge only wants Percy in his office because he wants to use
him to spy on the family - and Dumbledore."
"Bet Percy loved that."
"He went completely berserk. He said - well, he said loads of terrible stuff. He said he's been
mean -"
"What?" said Harry in disbelief, as Ginny made a noise like an angry cat.
"I know," said Ron in a low voice. "And it got worse. He said Dad was an idiot to run around
He's living here in London now."
"Mum's been in a right state," said Ron dully. "You know - crying and stuff. She came up to
meets Dad at work - ignores him, I s'pose."
"But Percy must know Voldemort's back," said Harry s lowly. "He's not stupid, he must know
your mum and dad wouldn't risk everything without proof."
"Yeah, well, your name got dragged into the row," said Ron, shooting Harry a furtive look.
"Percy said the only evidence was your word and... I dunno... he didn't think it was good
enough."
"Percy takes the Daily Prophet seriously," said Hermione tartly, and the others all nodded.
"What are you talking about?" Harry asked, looking around at them all. They were all regarding
"Haven't - haven't you been getting the Daily Prophet!" Hermione asked nervously.
"Yeah, I have!" said Harry.
"Have you - er - been reading it thoroughly?" Hermione asked, still more anxiously.
"Not cover to cover," said Harry defensively. "If they were going to report anything about
Voldemort it would be headline news, wouldn't it?"
The others flinched at the sound of the name. Hermione hurried on, "Well, you'd need to read it
cover to cover to pick it up, but they - um - they mention you a couple of times a week."
"But I'd have seen -"
"Not if you've only been reading the front page, you wouldn't," said Hermione, shaking her
head. "I'm not talking about big articles. They just slip you in, like you're a standing joke."
"What d'you -?"
"It's quite nasty, actually," said Hermione in a voice of forced calm. "They're just building on
Rita's stuff."
"But she's not writing for them any more, is she?"
"Oh, no, she's kept her promise - not that she's got any choice," Hermione added with
satisfaction. "But she laid the foundation for what they're trying to do now."
"Which is what?" said Harry impatiently.
"Okay, you know she wrote that you were collapsing all over the place and saying your scar was
hurting and all that?"
"Yeah," said Harry, who was not likely to forget Rita Skeeters stories about him in a hurry.
"Well, they're writing about you as though you're this deluded, attention-seeking person who
thinks he's a great tragic hero or something," said Hermione, very fast, as though it would be less
unpleasant for Harry to hear these facts quickly. "They keep slipping in snide comments about
you. If some far-fetched story appears, they say something like, 'tale worthy of Harry Potter', and if anyone has a funny accident or anything it's, 'lets hope he hasn't got a scar on his forehead or we'll be asked to worship him next -"
"I don't want anyone to worship -" Harry began hotly.
"I know you don't," said Hermione quickly, looking frightened. "I know, Harry. But you see what they're doing? They want to turn you into someone nobody will believe. Fudge is behind it, I'll bet anything. They want wizards on the street to think you're just some stupid boy who's a bit of a joke, who tells ridiculous tall stories because he loves being famous and wants to keep it
going."
"I didn't ask - I didn't want - Voldemort killed my parents!" Harry spluttered. "I got famous
they think I'd rather it'd never -"
"We know, Harry," said Ginny earnestly.
"And of course, they didn't report a word about the Dementors attacking you," said Hermione.
"Someone's told them to keep that quiet. That should've been a really big story, out-of-control
mean, if you're expelled, obviously," she went on hastily. "You really shouldn't be, not if they
abide by their own laws, there's no case against you."
"Uh oh."
"The meeting's over, you can come down and have dinner now. Everyone's dying to see you,
Harry. And who's left all those Dungbombs outside the kitchen door?"
"Crookshanks," said Ginny unblushingly. "He loves playing with them."
"Oh," said Mrs. Weasley, "I thought it might have been Kreacher, he keeps doing odd things like
have you been doing? Go and wash them before dinner, please."
"Look..." he muttered, but Ron shook his head, and Hermione said quietly, "We knew you'd be
Dumbledore -"
"Yeah, I know," said Harry shortly.
"Who's Kreacher?" he asked.
"The house-elf who lives here," said Ron. "Nutter. Never met one like him."
"He's not a nutter, Ron."
"His life's ambition is to have his head cut off and stuck up on a plaque just like his mother," said Ron irritably. "Is that normal, Hermione?"
"Well - well, if he is a bit strange, it's not his fault."
"Hermione still hasn't given up on SPEW -"
"It's not SPEW!" said Hermione heatedly. "It's the Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare.
And it's not just me, Dumbledore says we should be kind to Kreacher too."
"Yeah, yeah," said Ron. "C'mon, I'm starving."
"Hold it!" Ron breathed, flinging out an arm to stop Harry and Hermione walking any further.
"They're still in the hall, we might be able to hear something."
"Damnit," Harry heard Fred whisper, as he hoisted t he Extendable Ear back up again.
"Snape never eats here," Ron told Harry quietly. "Thank God. C'mon."
"And don't forget to keep your voice down in the hall, Harry," Hermione whispered.
"We're eating down in the kitchen," Mrs. Weasley whispered, meeting them at the bottom of the
stairs. "Harry, dear, if you'll just tiptoe across the hall, it's through this door here -"
"Tonks!" cried Mrs. Weasley in exasperation, turning to look behind her.
"I'm sorry!" wailed Tonks, who was lying flat on the floor. "It's that stupid umbrella stand, that's the second time I've tripped over -"
"Filth! Scum! By-products of dirt and vileness! Half-breeds, mutants, freaks, begone from this
place! How dare you befoul the house of my fathers -"
"Shut up, you horrible old hag, shut UP!" he roared, seizing the curtain Mrs. Weasley had
"Yoooou!" she howled, her eyes popping at the sight of the man. "Blood traitor, abomination,
shame of my flesh!"
"I said - shut - UP!" roared the man, and with a stupendous effort he and Lupin managed to force the curtains closed again.
"Hello, Harry," he said grimly, "I see you've met my mother."
"Your -?"
"My dear old mum, yeah," said Sirius. "We've been trying to get her down for a month but we
before they all wake up again."
"But what's a portrait of your mother doing here?" Harry asked, bewildered, as they went
"Hasn't anyone told you? This was my parents' house," said Sirius. "But I'm the last Black left,
been able to do."
"Harry!" Mr. Weasley said, hurrying forward to greet him, and shaking his hand vigorously.
"Good to see you!"
"Journey all right, Harry?" Bill called, trying to gather up twelve scrolls at once. "Mad-Eye didn't make you come via Greenland, then?"
"He tried," said Tonks, striding over to help Bill and immediately toppling a candle on to the last
piece of parchment. "Oh no - sorry -
"Here, dear," said Mrs. Weasley, sounding exasperated, and she repaired the parchment with a
"This sort of thing ought to be cleared away promptly at the end of meetings," she snapped,
Bill took out his wand, muttered, "Evanesco!" and the scrolls vanished.
"Sit down, Harry," said Sirius. "You've met Mundungus, haven't you?"
'Some'n say m'name?' Mundungus mumbled sleepily. "I 'gree with Sirius..." He raised a very
"The meeting's over, Dung," said Sirius, as they all sat down around him at the table. "Harry's
arrived."
"Eh?" said Mundungus, peering balefully at Harry through his matted ginger hair. "Blimey, so 'e
'as. Yeah... you all right, 'Arry?"
"Yeah," said Harry.
"Owe you a 'pology," grunted a voice from the middle of the smelly cloud.
"For the last time, Mundungus," called Mrs. Weasley, "will you please not smoke that thing in the kitchen, especially not when we're about to eat!"
"Ah," said Mundungus. "Right. Sorry, Molly."
"And if you want dinner before midnight I'll need a hand," Mrs. Weasley said to the room at
large. "No, you can stay where you are, Harry dear, you've had a long journey."
"What can I do, Molly?" said Tonks enthusiastically, bounding forwards.
"Er - no, it's all right, Tonks, you have a rest too, you've done enough today."
"No, no, I want to help!" said Tonks brightly, knocking over a chair as she hurried towards the
"Seen old Figgy since?" he asked.
"No," said Harry, "I haven't seen anyone."
"See, I wouldn't 'ave left," said Mundungus, leaning forward, a pleading note in his voice, "but I
'ad a business opportunity -"
"Had a good summer so far?"
"No, it's been lousy," said Harry.
"Don't know what you're complaining about, myself."
"What?" said Harry incredulously.
"Personally, I'd have welcomed a Dementor attack. A deadly struggle for my soul would have
and about, stretch your legs, get into a few fights... I've been stuck inside for a month."
"How come?" asked Harry, frowning.
"Because the Ministry of Magic's still after me, and Voldemort will know all about me being an
I can do for the Order of the Phoenix... or so Dumbledore feels."
"At least you've known what's been going on," he said bracingly.
"Oh yeah," said Sirius sarcastically. "Listening to Snape's reports, having to take all his snide
comfortable time... asking me how the cleanings going -"
"What cleaning?" asked Harry.
"Trying to make this place fit for human habitation," said Sirius, waving a hand around the dismal kitchen. "No one's lived here for ten years, not since my dear mother died, unless you count her old house-elf, and he's gone round the twist - hasn't cleaned anything in ages."
"Sirius," said Mundungus, who did not appear to have paid any attention to the conversation, but
had been closely examining an empty goblet. "This solid silver, mate?"
"Yes," said Sirius, surveying it with distaste. "Finest fifteenth-century goblin-wrought silver,
embossed with the Black family crest."
"That'd come off, though," muttered Mundungus, polishing it with his cuff.
"Fred - George - NO, JUST CARRY THEM!" Mrs. Weasley shrieked.
"FOR HEAVEN'S SAKE!" screamed Mrs. Weasley. "THERE WAS NO NEED - I'VE HAD
DON'T HAVE TO WHIP YOUR WANDS OUT FOR EVERY TINY LITTLE THING!"
"We were just trying to save a bit of time!" said Fred, hurrying forward to wrench the bread knife out of the table. "Sorry, Sirius, mate - didn't mean to -"
"Boys," Mr. Weasley said, lifting the stew back into the middle of the table, "your mother's right, you're supposed to show a sense of responsibility now you've come of age -"
"None of your brothers caused this sort of trouble!" Mrs. Weasley raged at the twins as she
slammed a fresh flagon of Butterbeer on to the table, and spilling almost as much again. "Bill
didn't feel the need to Apparate every few feet! Charlie didn't charm everything he met! Percy -"
"Let's eat," said Bill quickly.
"It looks wonderful, Molly," said Lupin, ladling stew on to a plate for her and handing it across
"I've been meaning to tell you, Sirius, there's something trapped in that writing desk in the
we ought to ask Alastor to have a look at it before we let it out."
"Whatever you like," said Sirius indifferently.
"The curtains in there are full of Doxys, too," Mrs. Weasley went on. "I thought we might try and tackle them tomorrow."
"I look forward to it," said Sirius. Harry heard the sarcasm in his voice, but he was not sure that
"Do that one like a pig snout, Tonks."
"They're not giving anything away yet," said Bill. "I still can't work out whether or not they
believe he's back. Course, they might prefer not to take sides at all. Keep out of it."
"I'm sure they'd never go over to You-Know-Who," said Mr. Weasley, shaking his head.
"They've suffered losses too; remember that goblin family he murdered last time, somewhere
near Nottingham?"
"I think it depends what they're offered," said Lupin. "And I'm not talking about gold. If they're
you still not had any luck with Ragnok, Bill?"
"He's feeling pretty anti-wizard at the moment," said Bill, "he hasn't stopped raging about the
from him, you know -"
"... and then," choked Mundungus, tears running down his face, "and then, if you'll believe it, 'e
all 'is own toads back orf me for a lot more'n what 'e paid in the first place -"
"I don't think we need to hear any more of your business dealings, thank you very much,
Mundungus," said Mrs. Weasley sharply, as Ron slumped forwards on to the table, howling with
"Beg pardon, Molly," said Mundungus at once, wiping his eyes and winking at Harry. "But, you
wrong."
"I don't know where you learned about right and wrong, Mundungus, but you seem to have
missed a few crucial lessons," said Mrs. Weasley coldly.
"Molly doesn't approve of Mundungus," said Sirius in an undertone.
"How come he's in the Order?" Harry said, very quietly.
"He's useful," Sirius muttered. "Knows all the crooks - well, he would, seeing as he's one
supposed to be tailing you."
"Nearly time for bed, I think," said Mrs. Weasley with a yawn.
"Not just yet, Molly" said Sirius, pushing away his empty plate and turning to look at Harry.
"You know, I'm surprised at you. I thought the first thing you'd do when you got here would be
to start asking questions about Voldemort."
"I did!" said Harry indignantly. "I asked Ron and Hermione but they said we're not allowed in the Order, so -"
"And they're quite right," said Mrs. Weasley. "You're too young."
"Since when did someone have to be in the Order of the Phoenix to ask questions?" asked Sirius.
"Harry's been trapped in that Muggle house for a month. He's got the right to know what's been
happen--"
"Hang on!" interrupted George loudly.
"How come Harry gets his questions answered?" said Fred angrily.
"We've been trying to get stuff out of you for a month and you haven't told us a single stinking
thing!" said George.
"'You're too young, you're not in the Order'," said Fred in a high-pitched voice that sounded
uncannily like his mother's. "Harry's not even of age!"
"It's not my fault you haven't been told what the Order's doing," said Sirius calmly, "that's your
parents' decision. Harry, on the other hand -"
"It's not down to you to decide what's good for Harry!" said Mrs. Weasley sharply. The
expression on her normally kind face looked dangerous. "You haven't forgotten what
Dumbledore said, I suppose?"
"Which bit?" Sirius asked politely, but with the air of a man readying himself for a fight.
"The bit about not telling Harry more than he needs to know," said Mrs. Weasley, placing a heavy emphasis on the last three words.
"I don't intend to tell him more than he needs to know, Molly," said Sirius. "But as he was the
one who saw Voldemort come back" (again, there was a collective shudder around the table at
the name) "he has more right than most to -"
"He's not a member of the Order of the Phoenix!" said Mrs. Weasley. "He's only fifteen and -"
"And he's dealt with as much as most in the Order," said Sirius, "and more than some."
"No one's denying what he's done!" said Mrs. Weasley, her voice rising, her fists trembling on
the arms of her chair. "But he's still -"
"He's not a child!" said Sirius impatiently.
"He's not an adult either!" said Mrs. Weasley, the color rising in her cheeks. "He's not James,
Sirius!"
"I'm perfectly clear who he is, thanks, Molly," said Sirius coldly.
"I'm not sure you are!" said Mrs. Weasley. "Sometimes, the way you talk about him, it's as
though you think you've got your best friend back!"
"What's wrong with that?" said Harry.
"What's wrong, Harry, is that you are not your father, however much you might look like him!"
said Mrs. Weasley, her eyes still boring into Sirius. "You are still at school and adults responsible for you should not forget it!"
"Meaning I'm an irresponsible godfather?" demanded Sirius, his voice rising.
"Meaning you have been known to act rashly, Sirius, which is why Dumbledore keeps reminding
you to stay at home and -"
"We'll leave my instructions from Dumbledore out of this, if you please!" said Sirius loudly.
"Arthur!" said Mrs. Weasley, rounding on her husband. "Arthur, back me up!"
"Dumbledore knows the position has changed, Molly. He accepts that Harry will have to be filled in, to a certain extent, now that he is staying at Headquarters."
"Yes, but there's a difference between that and inviting him to ask whatever he likes!"
"Personally," said Lupin quietly, looking away from Sirius at last, as Mrs. Weasley turned
quickly to him, hopeful that finally she was about to get an ally, "I think it better that Harry gets
from... others."
"Well," said Mrs. Weasley, breathing deeply and looking around the table for support that did not come, "well... I can see I'm going to be overruled. I'll just say this: Dumbledore must have had his reasons for not wanting Harry to know too much, and speaking as someone who has Harry's best interests at heart -"
"He's not your son," said Sirius quietly.
"He's as good as," said Mrs. Weasley fiercely. "Who else has he got?"
"He's got me!"
"Yes," said Mrs. Weasley, her lip curling, "the thing is, it's been rather difficult for you to look
after him while you've been locked up in Azkaban, hasn't it?"
"Molly, you're not the only person at this table who cares about Harry," said Lupin sharply.
"Sirius, sit down."
"I think Harry ought to be allowed a say in this," Lupin continued, "he's old enough to decide for
himself."
"I want to know what's been going on," Harry said at once.
"Very well," said Mrs. Weasley, her voice cracking. "Ginny - Ron - Hermione - Fred - George - I want you out of this kitchen, now."
"We're of age!" Fred and George bellowed together.
"If Harry's allowed, why can't I?" shouted Ron.
"Mum, I want to hear!" wailed Ginny.
"NO!" shouted Mrs. Weasley, standing up, her eyes over bright. "I absolutely forbid -"
"Molly, you can't stop Fred and George," said Mr. Weasley wearily. "They are of age."
"They're still at school."
"But they're legally adults now," said Mr. Weasley, in the same tired voice.
"I - oh, all right then, Fred and George can stay, but Ron -"
"Harry'll tell me and Hermione everything you say anyway!" said Ron hotly. "Won't - won't
you?" he added uncertainly, meeting Harry's eyes.
"Course I will," Harry said.
"Fine!" shouted Mrs. Weasley. "Fine! Ginny - BED!"
"Okay, Harry... what do you want to know?"
"Where's Voldemort?" he said, ignoring the renewed shudders and winces at the name. "What's
like him yet, no funny deaths or anything."
"That's because there haven't been any funny deaths yet," said Sirius, "not as far as we know,
anyway... and we know quite a lot."
"More than he thinks we do, anyway," said Lupin.
"How come he's stopped killing people?" Harry asked. He knew Voldemort had murdered more
"Because he doesn't want to draw attention to himself," said Sirius. "It would be dangerous for
him. His comeback didn't come off quite the way he wanted it to, you see. He messed it up."
"Or rather, you messed it up for him," said Lupin, with a satisfied smile.
"How?" Harry asked, perplexed.
"You weren't supposed to survive!" said Sirius. "Nobody apart from his Death Eaters was
supposed to know he'd come back. But you survived to bear witness."
"And the very last person he wanted alerted to his return the moment he got back was
Dumbledore," said Lupin. "And you made sure Dumbledore knew at once."
"How has that helped?" Harry asked.
"Are you kidding?" said Bill incredulously. "Dumbledore was the only one You-Know-Who was
ever scared of!"
"Thanks to you, Dumbledore was able to recall the Order of the Phoenix about an hour after
Voldemort returned," said Sirius.
"So, what's the Order been doing?" said Harry, looking around at them all.
"Working as hard as we can to make sure Voldemort can't carry out his plans," said Sirius.
"How d'you know what his plans are?" Harry asked quickly.
"Dumbledore's got a shrewd idea,' said Lupin, "and Dumbledore's shrewd ideas normally turn
out to be accurate."
"So what does Dumbledore reckon he's planning?"
"Well, firstly, he wants to build up his army again," said Sirius. "In the old days he had huge
on the Ministry of Magic with only a dozen Death Eaters."
"So you're trying to stop him getting more followers?"
"We're doing our best," said Lupin.
"How?"
"Well, the main thing is to try and convince as many people as possible that You-Know-Who
really has returned, to put them on their guard," said Bill. "It's proving tricky, though."
"Why?"
"Because of the Ministry's attitude," said Tonks. "You saw Cornelius Fudge after You-Know-
believe it's happened."
"But why?" said Harry desperately. "Why's he being so stupid? If Dumbledore -"
"Ah, well, you've put your finger on the problem," said Mr. Weasley with a wry smile. "Dumbledore."
"Fudge is frightened of him, you see," said Tonks sadly.
"Frightened of Dumbledore?" said Harry incredulously.
"Frightened of what he's up to," said Mr. Weasley. "Fudge thinks Dumbledore's plotting to
overthrow him. He thinks Dumbledore wants to be Minister for Magic."
"But Dumbledore doesn't want -"
"Of course he doesn't," said Mr. Weasley. "He's never wanted the Minister's job, even though a
Dumbledore never applied for the job."
"Deep down, Fudge knows Dumbledore's much cleverer than he is - a much more powerful
advice," said Lupin. "But it seems he's become fond of power, and much more confident. He
and Dumbledore's simply stirring up trouble for the sake of it."
"How can he think that?" said Harry angrily. "How can he think Dumbledore would just make it
all up - that I'd make it all up?"
"Because accepting that Voldemort's back would mean trouble like the Ministry hasn't had to
cope with for nearly fourteen years," said Sirius bitterly. "Fudge just can't bring himself to face
it. It's so much more comfortable to convince himself Dumbledore's lying to destabilize him."
"You see the problem," said Lupin. "While the Ministry insists there is nothing to fear from
the Death Eaters if they're using the Imperius Curse."
"But you're telling people, aren't you?" said Harry, looking around at Mr. Weasley, Sirius, Bill,
Mundungus, Lupin and Tonks. "You're letting people know he's back?"
"Well, as everyone thinks I'm a mad mass-murderer and the Ministry's put a ten thousand
Galleon price on my head, I can hardly stroll up the street and start handing out leaflets, can I?"
"And I'm not a very popular dinner guest with most of the community," said Lupin. "It's an
occupational hazard of being a werewolf."
"Tonks and Arthur would lose their jobs at the Ministry if they started shooting their mouths off," said Sirius, "and it's very important for us to have spies inside the Ministry, because you can bet Voldemort will have them."
"We've managed to convince a couple of people, though," said Mr. Weasley, "Tonks here, for
hunt for Sirius, so he's been feeding the Ministry information that Sirius is in Tibet."
"But if none of you are putting the news out that Voldemorts back -" Harry began.
"Who said none of us are putting the news out?" said Sirius. "Why d'you think Dumbledore's in
such trouble?"
"What d'you mean?" Harry asked.
"They're trying to discredit him," said Lupin. "Didn't you see the Daily Prophet last week? They
about taking away his Order of Merlin, First Class, too."
"But Dumbledore says he doesn't care what they do as long as they don't take him off the
Chocolate Frog Cards," said Bill, grinning.
"It's no laughing matter," said Mr. Weasley sharply. "If he carries on defying the Ministry like
go cautiously. If Dumbledore's out of the way - well, You-Know-Who will have a clear field."
"But if Voldemort's trying to recruit more Death Eaters it's bound to get out that he's come back, isn't it?" asked Harry desperately.
"Voldemort doesn't march up to people's houses and bang on their front doors, Harry," said
Sirius. "He tricks, jinxes and blackmails them. He's well-practiced at operating in secret. In any
"What's he after apart from followers?" Harry asked swiftly. He thought he saw Sirius and Lupin
"Stuff he can only get by stealth."
When Harry continued to look puzzled, Sirius said, "Like a weapon. Something he didn't have
last time."
"When he was powerful before?"
"Yes."
"Like what kind of weapon?" said Harry. "Something worse than the Avada Kedavra -?"
"That's enough!"
"I want you in bed, now. All of you," she added, looking around at Fred, George, Ron and
"You can't boss us -" Fred began.
"Watch me," snarled Mrs. Weasley. She was trembling slightly as she looked at Sirius. "You've
Order straightaway."
"Why not?" said Harry quickly. "I'll join, I want to join, I want to fight."
"No."
"The Order is comprised only of overage wizards," he said. "Wizards who have left school," he
added, as Fred and George opened their mouths. "There are dangers involved of which you can
have no idea, any of you... I think Molly's right, Sirius. We've said enough."
"I want you all to go straight to bed, no talking," she said as they reached the first landing, "we've got a busy day tomorrow. I expect Ginny's asleep," she added to Hermione, "so try not to wake her up."
"Asleep, yeah, right," said Fred in an undertone, after Hermione bade them goodnight and they
were climbing to the next floor. "If Ginny's not lying awake waiting for Hermione to tell her
everything they said downstairs then I'm a Flobberworm..."
"All right, Ron, Harry," said Mrs. Weasley on the second landing, pointing them into their
bedroom. "Off to bed with you."
"Night," Harry and Ron said to the twins.
"Sleep tight," said Fred, winking.
"We can't let them out to hunt every night," Ron explained as he pulled on his maroon pajamas.
"Dumbledore doesn't want too many owls swooping around the square, thinks it'll look
suspicious. Oh yeah... I forgot..."
"What're you doing that for?"
"Kreacher," said Ron as he turned off the light. "First night I was here he came wandering in at
room. Anyway..." he got into his bed, settled down under the covers then turned to look at Harry
window, "what d'you reckon?"
"Well, they didn't tell us much we couldn't have guessed, did they?" he said, thinking of all that
had been said downstairs. "I mean, all they've really said is that the Order's trying to stop people
joining Vol--"
"--demort," said Harry firmly. "When are you going to start using his name? Sirius and Lupin do."
"Yeah, you're right," he said, "we already knew nearly everything they told us, from using the
Extendable Ears. The only new bit was -"
"OUCH!"
"Keep your voice down, Ron, or Mum'll be back up he re."
"You two just Apparated on my knees!"
"Yeah, well, it's harder in the dark."
"So, got there yet?" said George eagerly.
"The weapon Sirius mentioned?" said Harry.
"Let slip, more like," said Fred with relish, now sitting next to Ron. "We didn't hear about that on the old Extendables, did we?"
"What d'you reckon it is?" said Harry.
"Could be anything," said Fred.
"But there can't be anything worse than the Avada Kedavra Curse, can there?" said Ron. "What's worse than death?"
"Maybe it's something that can kill loads of people at once," suggested George.
"Maybe it's some particularly painful way of killing people," said Ron fearfully.
"He's got the Cruciatus Curse for causing pain," said Harry, "he doesn't need anything more
efficient than that."
"So who d'you think's got it now?" asked George.
"I hope it's our side," said Ron, sounding slightly nervous.
"If it is, Dumbledore's probably keeping it," said Fred.
"Where?" said Ron quickly. "Hogwarts?"
"Bet it is!" said George. "That's where he hid the Sorcerer's Stone."
"A weapons going to be a lot bigger than the Stone, though!" said Ron.
"Not necessarily" said Fred.
"Yeah, size is no guarantee of power," said George. "Look at Ginny."
"What d'you mean?" said Harry.
"You've never been on the receiving end of one of her Bat-Bogey Hexes, have you?"
"Shh!" said Fred, half-rising from the bed. "Listen!"
"Mum," said George and without further ado there was a loud crack and Harry felt the weight
"She doesn't trust us at all, you know," said Ron regretfully.
Magical Creatures teacher was saying, "Beauties, arn' they, eh, Harry? We'll be studyin' weapons this term..." and Harry saw that the creatures had cannons for heads and were wheeling to face him... he ducked...
"Mum says get up, your breakfast is in the kitchen and then she needs you in the drawing room,
sofa."
"Cover your faces and take a spray," Mrs. Weasley said to Harry and Ron the moment she saw
them, pointing to two more bottles of black liquid standing on a spindle-legged table. "It's
Doxycide. I've never seen an infestation this bad - what that house-elf's been doing for the last ten years -"
"Kreacher's really old, he probably couldn't manage -"
"You'd be surprised what Kreacher can manage when he wants to, Hermione," said Sirius, who
had just entered the room carrying a bloodstained bag of what appeared to be dead rats. "I've just
been feeding Buckbeak," he added, in reply to Harry s enquiring look. "I keep him upstairs in my
mothers bedroom. Anyway... this writing desk..."
"Well, Molly, I'm pretty sure this is a Boggart," said Sirius, peering through the keyhole, "but
could be something much worse."
"Right you are, Sirius," said Mrs. Weasley.
"I keep telling them not to ring the doorbell!" said Sirius exasperatedly, hurrying out of the room.
"Stains, of dishonor, filthy half-breeds, blood traitors, children of filth"
"Close the door, please, Harry," said Mrs. Weasley.
Shacklebolt's saying, "Hestia's just relieved me, so she's got Moody's Cloak now, thought I'd
leave a report for Dumbledore..."
"Right, you lot, you need to be careful, because Doxys bite and their teeth are poisonous. I've got a bottle of antidote here, but I'd rather nobody needed it."
"When I say the word, start spraying immediately," she said. "They'll come flying out at us, I
just throw them in this bucket."
"All right - squirt!"
"Fred, what are you doing?" said Mrs. Weasley sharply. "Spray that at once and throw it away!"
"Right-o,' Fred said brightly, spraying the Doxy quickly in the face so that it fainted, but the
"We want to experiment with Doxy venom for our Skiving Snackboxes," George told Harry under his breath.
George and muttered out of the corner of his mouth, "What are Skiving Snackboxes?"
"Range of sweets to make you ill," George whispered, keeping a wary eye on Mrs. Weasley's
back. "Not seriously ill, mind, just ill enough to get you out of a class when you feel like it. Fred
the lesson for the hospital wing, you swallow the purple half -"
"which restores you to full fitness, enabling you to pursue the leisure activity of your own
what we're putting in the adverts, anyway," whispered Fred, who had edged over out of Mrs.
them to his pocket. "But they still need a bit of work. At the moment our testers are having a bit
of trouble stopping puking long enough to swallow the purple end."
"Testers?"
"Us," said Fred. "We take it in turns. George did the Fainting Fancies - we both tried the
Nosebleed Nougat -"
"Mum thought we'd been dueling," said George.
"Joke shop still on, then?" Harry muttered, pretending to be adjusting the nozzle on his spray.
"Well, we haven't had a chance to get premises yet," said Fred, dropping his voice even lower as
Mrs. Weasley mopped her brow with her scarf before returning to the attack, "so we're running it
as a mail-order service at the moment. We put advertisements in the Daily Prophet last week."
"All thanks to you, mate," said George. "But don't worry... Mum hasn't got a clue. She won't read the Daily Prophet any more, 'cause of it telling lies about you and Dumbledore."
"I think we'll tackle those after lunch." Mrs. Weasley pointed at the dusty glass-fronted cabinets
"Stay here," she said firmly, snatching up the bag of rats as Mrs. Black's screeches started up
again from down below. "I'll bring up some sandwiches."
"Mundungus!" said Hermione. "What's he brought all those cauldrons for?"
"Probably looking for a safe place to keep them," said Harry. "Isn't that what he was doing the
night he was supposed to be tailing me? Picking up dodgy cauldrons?"
"Yeah, you're right!" said Fred, as the front door opened; Mundungus heaved his cauldrons
through it and disappeared from view. "Blimey, Mum won't like that..."
"Mundungus is talking to Sirius and Kingsley," Fred muttered, frowning with concentration. "Can't hear properly... d'you reckon we can risk the Extendable Ears?"
"Might be worth it," said George. "I could sneak up stairs and get a pair -"
"WE ARE NOT RUNNING A HIDEOUT FOR STOLEN GOODS!"
"I love hearing Mum shouting at someone else," said Fred, with a satisfied smile on his face as he opened the door an inch or so to allow Mrs. Weasley's voice to permeate the room better, "it
makes such a nice change."
"- COMPLETELY IRRESPONSIBLE, AS IF WE HAVEN'T GOT ENOUGH TO WORRY
ABOUT WITHOUT YOU DRAGGING STOLEN CAULDRONS INTO THE HOUSE -"
"The idiots are letting her get into her stride," said George, shaking his head. "You've got to head her off early otherwise she builds up a head of steam and goes on for hours. And she's been
following you, Harry - and there goes Sirius's mum again."
"... smells like a drain and a criminal to boot, but she's no better, nasty old blood traitor with her
and werewolves and traitors and thieves, poor old Kreacher, what can he do..."
"Hello, Kreacher," said Fred very loudly, closing the door with a snap.
"Kreacher did not see young master," he said, turning around and bowing to Fred. Still facing the
carpet, he added, perfectly audibly, "Nasty little brat of a blood traitor it is."
"Sorry?" said George. "Didn't catch that last bit."
"Kreacher said nothing," said the elf, with a second bow to George, adding in a clear undertone,
"and there's its twin, unnatural little beasts they are."
"... and there's the Mudblood, standing there bold as brass, oh, if my mistress knew, oh, how
Kreacher doesn't know..."
"This is Harry, Kreacher," said Hermione tentatively. "Harry Potter."
"The Mudblood is talking to Kreacher as though she is my friend, if Kreacher's mistress saw him
in such company, oh, what would she say -"
"Don't call her a Mudblood!" said Ron and Ginny together, very angrily.
"It doesn't matter," Hermione whispered, "he's not in his right mind, he doesn't know what he's -"
"Don't kid yourself, Hermione, he knows exactly what he's saying," said Fred, eyeing Kreacher
"Is it true? Is it Harry Potter? Kreacher can see t he scar, it must be true, that's the boy who
stopped the Dark Lord, Kreacher wonders how he did it -"
"Don't we all, Kreacher," said Fred.
"What do you want, anyway?" George asked.
"Kreacher is cleaning," he said evasively.
"A likely story," said a voice behind Harry.
"Stand up straight," said Sirius impatiently. "Now, what are you up to?"
"Kreacher is cleaning," the elf repeated. "Kreacher lives to serve the Noble House of Black -"
"And it's getting blacker every day, it's filthy," said Sirius.
"Master always liked his little joke," said Kreacher, bowing again, and continuing in an
undertone, "Master was a nasty ungrateful swine who broke his mother's heart -"
"My mother didn't have a heart, Kreacher," snapped Sirius. "She kept herself alive out of pure
spite."
"Whatever Master says," he muttered furiously. "Master is not fit to wipe slime from his mother's boots, oh, my poor mistress, what would she say if she saw Kreacher serving him, how she hated him, what a disappointment he was -"
"I asked you what you were up to," said Sirius coldly. "Every time you show up pretending to be
cleaning, you sneak something off to your room so we can't throw it out."
"Kreacher would never move anything from its proper place in Master's house," said the elf, then muttered very fast, "Mistress would never forgive Kreacher if the tapestry was thrown out, seven centuries it's been in the family, Kreacher must save it, Kreacher will not let Master and the blood traitors and the brats destroy it -"
"I thought it might be that," said Sirius, casting a disdainful look at the opposite wall. "She'll have put another Permanent Sticking Charm on the back of it, I don't doubt, but if I can get rid of it I certainly will. Now go away, Kreacher."
"- comes back from Azkaban ordering Kreacher around, oh, my poor mistress, what would she
son of hers and he's back, they say he's a murderer too -"
"Keep muttering and I will be a murderer!" said Sirius irritably as he slammed the door shut on
"Sirius, he's not right in the head," Hermione pleaded, "I don't think he realizes we can hear him."
"He's been alone too long," said Sirius, "taking mad orders from my mother's portrait and talking to himself, but he was always a foul little -"
"If you could just set him free," said Hermione hopefully, "maybe -"
"We can't set him free, he knows too much about the Order" said Sirius curtly. "And anyway, the shock would kill him. You suggest to him that he leaves this house, see how he takes it."
"You're not on here!" said Harry, after scanning the bottom of the tree closely.
"I used to be there," said Sirius, pointing at a small, round, charred hole in the tapestry, rather like a cigarette burn. "My sweet old mother blasted me off after I ran away from home - Kreacher's quite fond of muttering the story under his breath."
"You ran away from home?"
"When I was about sixteen," said Sirius. "I'd had enough."
"Where did you go?" asked Harry, staring at him.
"Your dad's place," said Sirius. "Your grandparents were really good about it; they sort of adopted me as a second son. Yeah, I camped out at your dad's in the school holidays, and when I was seventeen I got a place of my own. My Uncle Alphard had left me a decent bit of gold - he's been wiped off here, too, that's probably why - anyway, after that I looked after myself. I was always welcome at Mr. and Mrs. Potter's for Sunday lunch, though."
"But... why did you...?"
"Leave?" Sirius smiled bitterly and ran his fingers through his long, unkempt hair. "Because I
Black made you practically royal... my idiot brother, soft enough to believe them... that's him."
"He was younger than me," said Sirius, "and a much better son, as I was constantly reminded."
"But he died," said Harry.
"Yeah," said Sirius. "Stupid idiot... he joined the Death Eaters."
"You're kidding!"
"Come on, Harry, haven't you seen enough of this house to tell what kind of wizards my family
were?" said Sirius testily.
"Were - were your parents Death Eaters as well?"
"No, no, but believe me, they thought Voldemort had the right idea, they were all for the
little hero for joining up at first."
"Was he killed by an Auror?" Harry asked tentatively.
"Oh, no," said Sirius. "No, he was murdered by Voldemort. Or on Voldemort's orders, more likely; I doubt Regulus was ever important enough to be killed by Voldemort in person. From what I found out after he died, he got in so far, then panicked about what he was being asked to do and tried to back out. Well, you don't just hand in your resignation to Voldemort. It's a lifetime of service or death."
"Lunch," said Mrs. Weasleys voice.
"I haven't looked at this for years. There's Phineas Nigellus... my great-great-grandfather, see?... least popular Headmaster Hogwarts ever had... and Araminta Mehflua... cousin of my
disowned. I see Tonks isn't on here. Maybe that's why Kreacher won't take orders from her - he's supposed to do whatever anyone in the family asks him -"
"You and Tonks are related?" Harry asked, surprised.
"Oh, yeah, her mother Andromeda was my favorite cousin," said Sirius, examining the tapestry
closely. "No, Andromeda's not on here either, look -"
"Andromeda's sisters are still here because they made lovely, respectable pure-blood marriages,
but Andromeda married a Muggle-born, Ted Tonks, so -"
"You're related to the Malfoys!"
"The pure-blood families are all interrelated," said Sirius. "If you're only going to let your sons
traitors it's the Weasleys."
"Lestrange..." Harry said aloud. The name had stirred something in his memory; he knew it from somewhere, but for a moment he couldn't think where, though it gave him an odd, creeping
"They're in Azkaban," said Sirius shortly.
"Bellatrix and her husband Rodolphus came in with Barty Crouch junior," said Sirius, in the same brusque voice. "Rodolphuss brother Rabastan was with them, too."
"You never said she was your -"
"Does it matter if she's my cousin?" snapped Sirius. "As far as I'm concerned, they're not my
glimpse of her coming into Azkaban. D'you think I'm proud of having a relative like her?"
"Sorry," said Harry quickly, "I didn't mean - I was just surprised, that's all -"
"It doesn't matter, don't apologize," Sirius mumbled. He turned away from the tapestry, his hands deep in his pockets. "I don't like being back here," he said, staring across the drawing room. "I never thought I'd be stuck in this house again."
"It's ideal for Headquarters, of course," Sirius said. "My father put every security measure known to wizard kind on it when he lived here. It's unplottable, so Muggles could never come and call - as if they'd ever have wanted to - and now Dumbledore's added his protection, you'd be hard put to find a safer house anywhere. Dumbledore is Secret Keeper for the Order, you know - nobody can find Headquarters unless he tells them personally where it is - that note Moody showed you last night, that was from Dumbledore..." Sirius gave a short, bark-like laugh. "If my parents could see the use their house was being put to now... well, my mothers portrait should give you some idea."
"I wouldn't mind if I could just get out occasionally and do something useful. I've asked
a bit of moral support, what d'you think?"
"Don't worry," Sirius said. Harry looked up and realized that Sirius had been watching him. "I'm
being allowed to use magic to save your own life."
"But if they do expel me," said Harry quietly, "can I come back here and live with you?"
"We'll see."
"I'd feel a lot better about the hearing if I knew I didn't have to go back to the Dursleys," Harry
"They must be bad if you prefer this place," said Sirius gloomily.
"Hurry up, you two, or there won't be any food left," Mrs. Weasley called.
"It's okay," he said, examining the hand with interest before tapping it lightly with his wand and
restoring its skin to normal, "must be Wartcap powder in there."
"It means he gave them a load of gold," said Sirius contemptuously, throwing the medal into the
"It was my father's," said Sirius, throwing the ring into the sack. "Kreacher wasn't quite as devoted to him as to my mother, but I still caught him snogging a pair of my father's old trousers last week."
Snape might refer to their work as 'cleaning', but in Harry's opinion they were really waging war on the house, which was putting up a very good fight, aided and abetted by Kreacher. The house-elf kept appearing wherever they were congregated, his muttering becoming more and more offensive as he attempted to remove anything he could from the rubbish sacks. Sirius went as far as to threaten him with clothes, but Kreacher fixed him with a watery stare and said, "Master must do as Master wishes," before turning away and muttering very loudly, "but Master will not turn Kreacher away, no, because Kreacher knows what they are up to, oh yes, he is plotting against the Dark Lord, yes, with these Mudbloods and traitors and scum..." At which Sirius, ignoring Hermione's protests, seized Kreacher by the back of his loincloth and
dinner on Wednesday evening and said quietly, "I've ironed your best clothes for tomorrow
wonders."
"How am I getting there?" he asked Mrs. Weasley, trying to sound unconcerned.
"Arthurs taking you to work with him," said Mrs. Weasley gently.
"You can wait in my office until it's time for the hearing," he said.
"Professor Dumbledore doesn't think it's a good idea for Sirius to go with you, and I must say I -"
"think he's quite right," said Sirius through clenched teeth.
"When did Dumbledore tell you that?" Harry said, staring at Sirius.
"He came last night, when you were in bed," said Mr. Weasley.
"Breakfast," she said as she pulled out her wand and hurried over to the fire.
"M - m - morning, Harry," yawned Tonks. Her hair was blonde and curly this morning. "Sleep all right?"
"Yeah," said Harry.
"I've b - b - been up all night," she said, with another shuddering yawn. "Come and sit down..."
"What do you want, Harry?" Mrs. Weasley called. "Porridge? Muffins? Kippers? Bacon and
eggs? Toast?"
"Just - just toast, thanks," said Harry.
Lupin glanced at Harry, then said to Tonks, "What were you saying about Scrimgeour?"
"Oh... yeah... well, we need to be a bit more careful, he's been asking Kingsley and me funny
questions..."
"... and I'll have to tell Dumbledore I can't do night duty tomorrow, I'm just too tired," Tonks
"I'll cover for you," said Mr. Weasley. "I'm okay, I've got a report to finish anyway."
"How are you feeling?"
"It'll all be over soon," Mr. Weasley said bracingly. "In a few hours time you'll be cleared."
"The hearing's on my floor, in Amelia Bones's office. She's Head of the Department of Magical
Law Enforcement, and the one who'll be questioning you."
"Amelia Bones is okay, Harry," said Tonks earnestly. "She's fair, she'll hear you out."
"Don't lose your temper," said Sirius abruptly. "Be polite and stick to the facts."
"The law's on your side," said Lupin quietly. "Even underage wizards are allowed to use magic in life-threatening situations."
"Doesn't it ever lie flat?" she said desperately.
"I think we'll go now," he said. "We're a bit early but I think you'll be better off at the Ministry
than hanging around here."
"Okay," said Harry automatically, dropping his toast and getting to his feet.
"You'll be all right, Harry," said Tonks, patting him on the arm.
"Good luck," said Lupin. "I'm sure it will be fine." '
"And if it's not," said Sirius grimly "I'll see to Amelia Bones for you..."
"We've all got our fingers crossed," she said.
"Right," said Harry. "Well... see you later then."
"You don't normally walk to work, do you?" Harry asked him, as they set off briskly around the
"No, I usually Apparate," said Mr. Weasley, "but obviously you can't, and I think it's best we
being disciplined for..."
"Simply fabulous," he whispered, indicating the automatic ticket machines. "Wonderfully
ingenious."
"They're out of order," said Harry, pointing at the sign.
"Yes, but even so..." said Mr. Weasley, beaming at them fondly
"Four more stops, Harry... Three stops left now... Two stops to go, Harry..."
"Where are we?" said Mr. Weasley blankly, and for one heart-stopping moment Harry thought
a second later he said, "Ah yes... this way, Harry," and led him down a side road.
"Sorry," he said, "but I never come by train and it all looks rather different from a Muggle
perspective. As a matter of fact, I've never even used the visitors' entrance before."
"Here we are," said Mr. Weasley brightly, pointing at an old red telephone box, which was
missing several panes of glass and stood before a heavily graffitied wall. "After you, Harry."
"Mr. Weasley, I think this might be out of order, too," Harry said.
"No, no, I'm sure it's fine," said Mr. Weasley, holding the receiver above his head and peering at
the dial. "Let's see... six..." he dialed the number, "two... four... and another four... and
another two..."
"Welcome to the Ministry of Magic. Please state your name and business."
"Er..." said Mr. Weasley, clearly uncertain whether or not he should talk into the receiver. He
compromised by holding the mouthpiece to his ear, "Arthur Weasley, Misuse of Muggle
Artifacts Office, here to escort Harry Potter, who has been asked to attend a disciplinary hearing..."
"Thank you," said the cool female voice. "Visitor, please take the badge and attach it to the front
of your robes."
"Visitor to the Ministry, you are required to submit to a search and present your wand for
registration at the security desk, which is located at the far end of the Atrium."
"The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasant day," said the woman's voice.
"This way," said Mr. Weasley.
"Over here, Harry," said Mr. Weasley, and they stepped out of the stream of Ministry employees
"I'm escorting a visitor," said Mr. Weasley, gesturing towards Harry.
"Step over here," said the wizard in a bored voice.
"Wand," grunted the security wizard at Harry, putting down the golden instrument and holding
"Eleven inches, phoenix-feather core, been in use four years. That correct?"
"Yes," said Harry nervously.
"I keep this," said the wizard, impaling the slip of parchment on a small brass spike. "You get this back," he added, thrusting the wand at Harry.
"Thank you."
"Hang on..." said the wizard slowly.
"Thank you, Eric," said Mr. Weasley firmly, and grasping Harry by the shoulder he steered him
"All right, Arthur?" said the wizard, nodding at Mr. Weasley.
"What've you got there, Bob?" asked Mr. Weasley, looking at the box.
"We're not sure," said the wizard seriously. "We thought it was a bog-standard chicken until it
started breathing fire. Looks like a serious breach of the Ban on Experimental Breeding to me."
"Level Seven, Department of Magical Games and Sports, incorporating the British and Irish
Quidditch League Headquarters, Official Gobstones Club and Ludicrous Patents Office."
"Level Six, Department of Magical Transportation, incorporating the Floo Network Authority,
Broom Regulatory Control, Portkey Office and Apparation Test Center."
"Just inter-departmental memos," Mr. Weasley muttered to him. "We used to use owls, but the
mess was unbelievable... droppings all over the desks..."
"Level Five, Department of International Magical Co -operation, incorporating the International
Confederation of Wizards, British Seats."
"Level Four, Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures, incorporating
Beast, Being and Spirit Divisions, Goblin Liaison Office and Pest Advisory Bureau."
"S'cuse," said the wizard carrying the fire-breathing chicken and he left the lift pursued by a little flock of memos. The doors clanged shut yet again.
"Level Three, Department of Magical Accidents and Catastrophes, including the Accidental
Magic Reversal Squad, Obliviator Headquarters and Muggle-Worthy Excuse Committee."
"Level Two, Department of Magical Law Enforcement, including the Improper Use of Magic
Office, Auror Headquarters and Wizengamot Administration Services."
"This is us, Harry," said Mr. Weasley, and they followed the witch out of the lift into a corridor
lined with doors. "My office is on the other side o f the floor."
"Mr. Weasley" said Harry, as they passed a window through which sunlight was streaming,
"aren't we still underground?"
"Yes, we are," said Mr. Weasley. "Those are enchanted windows. Magical Maintenance decide
for a pay rise... Just round here, Harry."
"Morning, Weasley," said Kingsley carelessly, as they drew nearer. "I've been wanting a word
with you, have you got a second?"
"Yes, if it really is a second," said Mr. Weasley, "I'm in rather a hurry."
"Here," said Kingsley brusquely to Mr. Weasley, shoving a sheaf of parchment into his hand. "I
months. We've received information that Black might still be using his old motorcycle."
Kingsley tipped Harry an enormous wink and added, in a whisper, "Give him the magazine, he
might find it interesting." Then he said in normal tones, "And don't take too long, Weasley, the
delay on that firelegs report held our investigation up for a month."
"If you had read my report you would know that the term is firearms," said Mr. Weasley coolly.
"And I'm afraid you'll have to wait for information on motorcycles; we're extremely busy at the
moment." He dropped his voice and said, "If you can get away before seven, Molly's making
meatballs."
"We haven't got a window," said Mr. Weasley apologetically, taking off his bomber jacket and
placing it on the back of his chair. "We've asked, but they don't seem to think we need one. Have a seat, Harry, doesn't look as if Perkins is in yet."
"Ah," he said, grinning, as he extracted a copy of a magazine entitled The Quibbler from its
midst, "yes..." He flicked through it. "Yes, he's right, I'm sure Sirus will find that very amusing - oh dear, what's this now?"
"'Third regurgitating public toilet reported in Bethnal Green, kindly investigate immediately.'
This is getting ridiculous..."
"A regurgitating toilet?"
"Anti-Muggle pranksters," said Mr. Weasley, frowning. "We had two last week, one in
they're called - you know, the ones who mend pipes and things."
"Plumbers?"
"Exactly, yes, but of course they're flummoxed. I only hope we can catch whoever's doing it."
"Will it be Aurors who catch them?"
"Oh no, this is too trivial for Aurors, it'll be the ordinary Magical Law Enforcement Patrol - ah,
Harry, this is Perkins."
"Oh, Arthur!" he said desperately, without looking at Harry. "Thank goodness, I didn't know
but you've obviously missed it - an urgent message came ten minutes ago -"
"I know about the regurgitating toilet," said Mr. Weasley.
"No, no, it's not the toilet, it's the Potter boy's hearing - they've changed the time and venue - it
starts at eight o'clock now and it's down in old Courtroom Ten -"
"Down in old - but they told me - Merlin's beard!"
"Quick, Harry, we should have been there five minutes ago!"
"Why have they changed the time?" Harry said breathlessly, as they hurtled past the Auror
"I've no idea, but thank goodness we got here so early, if you'd missed it, it would have been
catastrophic!"
"Come ON!"
"Those courtrooms haven't been used in years," said Mr. Weasley angrily. "I can't think why
they're doing it down there - unless - but no -"
"The Atrium," said the cool female voice and the golden grilles slid open, showing Harry a
"Morning, Arthur," he said in a sepulchral voice as the lift began to descend. "Don't often see you down here."
"Urgent business, Bode," said Mr. Weasley, who was bouncing on the balls of his feet and
"Ah, yes," said Bode, surveying Harry unblinkingly. "Of course."
"Department of Mysteries," said the cool female voice, and left it at that.
"Quick, Harry," said Mr. Weasley as the lift doors rattled open, and they sped up a corridor that
"Down here, down here," panted Mr. Weasley, taking two steps at a time. "The lift doesn't even
come down this far... why they're doing it down there I..."
"Courtroom... Ten... I think... we're nearly... yes."
"Go on," he panted, pointing his thumb at the door. "Get in there."
"Aren't - aren't you coming with -"
"No, no, I'm not allowed. Good luck!"
"You're late."
"Sorry," said Harry nervously "I -- I didn't know the time had been changed."
"That is not the Wizengamot's fault," said the voice. "An owl was sent to you this morning. Take your seat."
"Very well," said Fudge. "The accused being present - finally - let us begin. Are you ready?" he
"Yes, sir," said an eager voice Harry knew. Ron's brother Percy was sitting at the very end of the
"Disciplinary hearing of the twelfth of August," said Fudge in a ringing voice, and Percy began
taking notes at once, "into offences committed under the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery and the International Statute of Secrecy by Harry James Potter, resident at
"Interrogators: Cornelius Oswald Fudge, Minister for Magic; Amelia Susan Bones, Head of the
Minister. Court Scribe, Percy Ignatius Weasley -"
"Witness for the defense, Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore," said a quiet voice from
"Ah," said Fudge, who looked thoroughly disconcerted. "Dumbledore. Yes. You - er - got our - er - message that the time and -er - place of the hearing had been changed, then?"
"I must have missed it," said Dumbledore cheerfully..."However, due to a lucky mistake I arrived at the Ministry three hours early, so no harm done."
"Yes - well - I suppose we'll need another chair - I - Weasley, could you -?"
"Not to worry, not to worry," said Dumbledore pleasantly; he took out his wand, gave it a little
"Yes," said Fudge again, shuffling his notes. "Well, then. So. The charges. Yes."
"the charges against the accused are as follows: That he did knowingly, deliberately and in full
"You are Harry James Potter, of number four, Privet Drive, Little Whinging, Surrey?" Fudge said, glaring at Harry over the top of his parchment.
"Yes," Harry said.
"You received an official warning from the Ministry for using illegal magic three years ago, did
you not?"
"Yes, but -"
"And yet you conjured a Patronus on the night of the second of August?" said Fudge.
"Yes," said Harry, "but -"
"Knowing that you are not permitted to use magic outside school while you are under the age of
seventeen?"
"Yes, but -"
"Knowing that you were in an area full of Muggles?"
"Yes, but -"
"Fully aware that you were in close proximity to a Muggle at the time?"
"Yes," said Harry angrily, "but I only used it because we were -"
"You produced a fully-fledged Patronus?"
"Yes," said Harry, "because -"
"A corporeal Patronus?"
"A - what?" said Harry.
"Your Patronus had a clearly defined form? I mean t o say, it was more than vapour or smoke?"
"Yes," said Harry, feeling both impatient and slightly desperate, "it's a stag, it's always a stag."
"Always?" boomed Madam Bones. "You have produced a Patronus before now?"
"Yes," said Harry, "I've been doing it for over a year."
"And you are fifteen years old?"
"Yes, and -"
"You learned this at school?"
"Yes, Professor Lupin taught me in my third year, because of the -"
"Impressive," said Madam Bones, staring down at him, "a true Patronus at his age... very
impressive indeed."
"It's not a question of how impressive the magic was," said Fudge in a testy voice, "in fact, the
Muggle!"
"I did it because of the Dementors!" he said loudly, before anyone could interrupt him again.
"Dementors?" said Madam Bones after a moment, her thick eyebrows rising until her monocle
looked in danger of falling out. "What do you mean, boy?"
"I mean there were two Dementors down that alleyway and they went for me and my cousin!"
"Ah," said Fudge again, smirking unpleasantly as he looked around at the Wizengamot, as though inviting them to share the joke. "Yes. Yes, I thought we'd be hearing something like this."
"Dementors in Little Whinging?" Madam Bones said, in a tone of great surprise. "I don't
understand -"
"Don't you, Amelia?" said Fudge, still smirking. "Let me explain. He's been thinking it through
word and no witnesses..."
"I'm not lying!" said Harry loudly, over another outbreak of muttering from the court. "There were two of them, coming from opposite ends of the alley, everything went dark and cold and my cousin felt them and ran for it -"
"Enough, enough!" said Fudge, with a very supercilious look on his face. "I'm sorry to interrupt
what I'm sure would have been a very well-rehearsed story -"
"We do, in fact, have a witness to the presence of Dementors in that alleyway," he said, "other than Dudley Dursley, I mean."
together, said, "We haven't got time to listen to more tarradiddles, I'm afraid, Dumbledore. I want this dealt with quickly -"
"I may be wrong," said Dumbledore pleasantly, "but I am sure that under the Wizengamot Charter of Rights, the accused has the right to present witnesses for his or her case? Isn't that the policy of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, Madam Bones?" he continued, addressing the witch in the monocle.
"True," said Madam Bones. "Perfectly true."
"Oh, very well, very well," snapped Fudge. "Where is this person?"
"I brought her with me," said Dumbledore. "She's just outside the door. Should I -?"
"No -- Weasley, you go," Fudge barked at Percy, who got up at once, ran down the stone steps
"Full name?" said Fudge loudly, when Mrs. Figg had perched herself nervously on the very edge
"Arabella Doreen Figg," said Mrs. Figg in her quavery voice.
"And who exactly are you?" said Fudge, in a bored and lofty voice.
"I'm a resident of Little Whinging, close to where Harry Potter lives," said Mrs. Figg.
"We have no record of any witch or wizard living in Little Whinging, other than Harry Potter,"
said Madam Bones at once. "That situation has always been closely monitored, given... given
past events."
"I'm a Squib," said Mrs. Figg. "So you wouldn't have me registered, would you?"
"A Squib, eh?" said Fudge, eyeing her closely. "We'll be checking that. You'll leave details of your parentage with my assistant Weasley. Incidentally, can Squibs see Dementors?" he added,
"Yes, we can!" said Mrs. Figg indignantly.
Fudge looked back down at her, his eyebrows raised. "Very well," he said aloofly. "What is your
story?"
"I had gone out to buy cat food from the corner shop at the end of Wisteria Walk, around about
nine o'clock, on the evening of the second of August," gabbled Mrs. Figg at once, as though she
had learned what she was saying by heart, "when I heard a disturbance down the alleyway
Dementors running -"
"Running?" said Madam Bones sharply. "Dementors don't run, they glide."
"That's what I meant to say," said Mrs. Figg quickly, patches of pink appearing in her withered
cheeks. "Gliding along the alley towards what looked like two boys."
"What did they look like?" said Madam Bones, narrowing her eyes so that the edge of the
"Well, one was very large and the other one rather skinny -"
"No, no," said Madam Bones impatiently. "The Dementors... describe them."
"Oh," said Mrs. Figg, the pink flush creeping up her neck now. "They were big. Big and wearing
cloaks."
"Big and wearing cloaks," repeated Madam Bones coolly, while Fudge snorted derisively. "I see. Anything else?"
"Yes," said Mrs. Figg. "I felt them. Everything went cold, and this was a very warm summer's
remembered... dreadful things..."
"What did the Dementors do?" she asked, and Harry felt a rush of hope.
"They went for the boys," said Mrs. Figg, her voice stronger and more confident now, the pink
flush ebbing away from her face. "One of them had fallen. The other was backing away, trying to
encouragement, chased the second one away from his cousin. And that that is what happened,"
fidgeting with his papers. Finally, he raised his eyes and said, rather aggressively, "that's what
you saw, is it?"
"That is what happened," Mrs. Figg repeated.
"Very well," said Fudge. "You may go."
"Not a very convincing witness," said Fudge loftily.
"Oh, I don't know," said Madam Bones, in her booming voice. "She certainly described the effects of a Dementor attack very accurately. And I can't imagine why she would say they were there if they weren't."
"But Dementors wandering into a Muggle suburb and just happening to come across a wizard?"
snorted Fudge. "The odds on that must be very, very long. Even Bagman wouldn't have bet -"
"Oh, I don't think any of us believe the Dementors were there by coincidence," said Dumbledore
"And what is that supposed to mean?" Fudge asked icily.
"It means that I think they were ordered there," said Dumbledore.
"I think we might have a record of it if someone had ordered a pair of Dementors to go strolling
through Little Whanging!" barked Fudge.
"Not if the Dementors are taking orders from someone other than the Ministry of Magic these
days," said Dumbledore calmly. "I have already given you my views on this matter, Cornelius."
"Yes, you have"' said Fudge forcefully, "and I have no reason to believe that your views are
doing everything we ask them to."
"Then," said Dumbledore, quietly but clearly, "we must ask ourselves why somebody within the
Ministry ordered a pair of Dementors into that alleyway on the second of August."
"The Chair recognizes Dolores Jane Umbridge, Senior Undersecretary to the Minister," said
"I'm sure I must have misunderstood you, Professor Dumbledore," she said, with a simper that left her big, round eyes as cold as ever. "So silly of me. But it sounded for a teensy moment as though you were suggesting that the Ministry of Magic had ordered an attack on this boy!"
"If it is true that the Dementors are taking orders only from the Ministry of Magic, and it is also
somebody at the Ministry might have ordered the attacks," said Dumbledore politely. "Of course,
these particular Dementors may have been outside Ministry control -"
"There are no Dementors outside Ministry control!" snapped Fudge, who had turned brick red.
"Then undoubtedly the Ministry will be making a full inquiry into why two Dementors were so
very far from Azkaban and why they attacked without authorization."
"It is not for you to decide what the Ministry of Magic does or does not do, Dumbledore!"
"Of course it isn't," said Dumbledore mildly. "I was merely expressing my confidence that this
matter will not go uninvestigated."
"I would remind everybody that the behavior of these Dementors, if indeed they are not
figments of this boy's imagination, is not the subject of this hearing!" said Fudge. "We are here to examine Harry Potter's offences under the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage
Sorcery!"
"Of course we are," said Dumbledore, "but the presence of Dementors in that alleyway is highly
present at the time of the -"
"We are familiar with Clause Seven, thank you very much!" snarled Fudge.
"Of course you are," said Dumbledore courteously. "Then we are in agreement that Harry's use of the Patronus Charm in these circumstances falls precisely into the category of exceptional
circumstances the clause describes?"
"If there were Dementors, which I doubt."
"You have heard it from an eyewitness," Dumbledore interrupted. "If you still doubt her truthfulness, call her back, question her again. I am sure she would not object."
"I - that - not -" blustered Fudge, fiddling with the papers before him. "It's - I want this over with
today, Dumbledore!"
"But naturally, you would not care how many times you heard from a witness, if the alternative
was a serious miscarriage of justice," said Dumbledore.
"Serious miscarriage, my hat!" said Fudge at the top of his voice. "Have you ever bothered to tot
Charm he used three years ago -"
"That wasn't me, it was a house-elf!" said Harry.
"YOU SEE" roared Fudge, gesturing flamboyantly in Harry's direction. "A house-elf! In a
Muggle house! I ask you."
"The house-elf in question is currently in the employ of Hogwarts School," said Dumbledore. "I
can summon him here in an instant to give evidence if you wish."
"I - not - I haven't got time to listen to house-elves! Anyway, that's not the only - he blew up his
aunt, for God's sake!" Fudge shouted, banging his fist on the judge's bench and upsetting a bottle of ink.
"And you very kindly did not press charges on that occasion, accepting, I presume, that even the
best wizards cannot always control their emotions," said Dumbledore calmly, as Fudge attempted to scrub the ink off his notes.
"And I haven't even started on what he gets up to at school."
"But, as the Ministry has no authority to punish Hogwarts students for misdemeanors at school,
Harry's behavior there is not relevant to this hearing," said Dumbledore, as politely as ever, but
"Oho!" said Fudge. "Not our business what he does at school, eh? You think so?"
"The Ministry does not have the power to expel Hogwarts students, Cornelius, as I reminded you
on the night of the second of August," said Dumbledore. "Nor does it have the right to confiscate wands until charges have been successfully proven; again, as I reminded you on the night of the second of August. In your admirable haste to ensure that the law is upheld, you appear, inadvertently I am sure, to have overlooked a few laws yourself."
"Laws can be changed," said Fudge savagely.
"Of course they can," said Dumbledore, inclining his head. "And you certainly seem to be making many changes, Cornelius. Why, in the few short weeks since I was asked to leave the
matter of underage magic!"
"As far as I am aware," Dumbledore continued, "there is no law yet in place that says this court's
verdict."
"Those in favor of clearing the witness of all charges?" said Madam Boness booming voice.
Breathing very fast, he tried to count, but before he could finish, Madam Bones had said, "And
those in favor of conviction?"
suppressed rage, "Very well, very well... cleared of all charges."
"Excellent," said Dumbledore briskly, springing to his feet, pulling out his wand and causing the
two chintz armchairs to vanish. "Well, I must be getting along. Good-day to you all." And without looking once at Harry, he swept from the dungeon.
"Dumbledore didn't say -"
"Cleared," Harry said, pulling the door closed behind him, "of all charges!"
"Harry, that's wonderful! Well, of course, they couldn't have found you guilty, not on the
evidence, but even so, I can't pretend I wasn't -"
"Merlin's beard!" exclaimed Mr. Weasley wonderingly, pulling Harry aside to let them all pass.
"You were tried by the full court?"
"I think so," said Harry quietly.
said, "Morning, Arthur," to Mr. Weasley, but most averted their eyes. Cornelius Fudge and the
"I'm going to take you straight back so you can tell the others the good news," he said, beckoning Harry forwards as Percy's heels disappeared up the steps to Level Nine. "I'll drop you off on the way to that toilet in Bethnal Green. Come on..."
"So, what will you have to do about the toilet?" Harry asked, grinning. Everything suddenly
"Oh, it's a simple enough anti-jinx," said Mr. Weasley as they mounted the stairs, "but it's not so
much having to repair the damage, it's more the attitude behind the vandalism, Harry. Mugglebaiting might strike some wizards as funny, but it's an expression of something much deeper and nastier, and I for one -"
"Well, well, well... Patronus Potter," said Lucius Malfoy coolly.
"The Minister was just telling me about your lucky escape, Potter," drawled Mr. Malfoy. "Quite
astonishing, the way you continue to wriggle out of very tight holes... snakelike, in fact."
"Yeah," said Harry, "yeah, I'm good at escaping."
"And Arthur Weasley too! What are you doing here, Arthur?"
"I work here," said Mr. Weasley curtly.
"Not here, surely?" said Mr. Malfoy, raising his eye brows and glancing towards the door over
Mr. Weasley's shoulder. "I thought you were up on the second floor... don't you do something
that involves sneaking Muggle artifacts home and bewitching them?"
"No," Mr. Weasley snapped, his fingers now biting into Harry's shoulder.
"What are you doing here, anyway?" Harry asked Lucius Malfoy.
"I don't think private matters between myself and the Minister are any concern of yours, Potter,"
sounded like a full pocket of gold. "Really, just because you are Dumbledore's favorite boy, you must not expect the same indulgence from the rest of us... shall we go up to your office, then, Minister?"
"Certainly" said Fudge, turning his back on Harry and Mr. Weasley. "This way, Lucius."
"Why wasn't he waiting outside Fudge's office if they've got business to do together?" Harry
burst out furiously. "What was he doing down here?"
"Trying to sneak down to the courtroom, if you ask me," said Mr. Weasley, looking extremely
"Trying to find out whether you'd been expelled or not. I'll leave a note for Dumbledore when I
drop you off, he ought to know Malfoys been talking to Fudge again."
"What private business have they got together, anyway?"
"Gold, I expect," said Mr. Weasley angrily. "Malfoy's been giving generously to all sorts of
doesn't want passed... oh, he's very well-connected, Lucius Malfoy."
"Mr. Weasley" said Harry slowly, "if Fudge is meeting Death Eaters like Malfoy, if he's seeing
them alone, how do we know they haven't put the Imperius Curse on him?"
"Don't think it hasn't occurred to us, Harry" said Mr. Weasley quietly. "But Dumbledore thinks
comfort. Best not talk about it any more just now, Harry."
"Wait..." he told Mr. Weasley, and, pulling his moneybag from his pocket, he turned back to the
"I knew it!" yelled Ron, punching the air. "You always get away with stuff!"
"They were bound to clear you," said Hermione, who had looked positively faint with anxiety
when Harry had entered the kitchen and was now holding a shaking hand over her eyes, "there
was no case against you, none at all."
"Everyone seems quite relieved, though, considering you all knew I'd get off," said Harry,
of war dance to a chant that went: "He got off, he got off, he got off..."
"That's enough! Settle down!" shouted Mr. Weasley, though he too was smiling. "Listen, Sirius,
Lucius Malfoy was at the Ministry -"
"What?" said Sirius sharply.
"He got off, he got off, he got off..."
"Be quiet, you three! Yes, we saw him talking to Fudge on Level Nine, then they went up to
Fudge's office together. Dumbledore ought to know."
"Absolutely," said Sirius. "We'll tell him, don't worry."
"Well, I'd better get going, there's a vomiting toilet waiting for me in Bethnal Green. Molly, I'll
be late, I'm covering for Tonks, but Kingsley might be dropping in for dinner -"
"He got off, he got off, he got off..."
"That's enough - Fred - George - Ginny!" said Mrs. Weasley, as Mr. Weasley left the kitchen.
"Harry, dear, come and sit down, have some lunch, you hardly ate breakfast."
"Course, once Dumbledore turned up on your side, there was no way they were going to convict
you," said Ron happily, now dishing great mounds of mashed potatoes on to everyone's plates.
"Yeah, he swung it for me," said Harry. He felt it would sound highly ungrateful, not to mention
childish, to say, "I wish he'd talked to me, though. Or even looked at me."
"What's up?" said Hermione, looking alarmed.
"Scar," Harry mumbled. "But it's nothing... it happens all the time now..."
looked rather anxious, but before she could say anything, Ron had said happily, "I bet
Dumbledore turns up this evening, to celebrate with us, you know."
"I don't think he'll be able to, Ron," said Mrs. Weasley, setting a huge plate of roast chicken
down in front of Harry. "He's really very busy at the moment."
"HE GOT OFF, HE GOT OFF, HE GOT OFF"
"SHUT UP!" roared Mrs. Weasley.
"Don't you go feeling guilty!" said Hermione sternly, after Harry had confided some of his
later. "You belong at Hogwarts and Sirius knows it. Personally, I think he's being selfish."
"That's a bit harsh, Hermione," said Ron, frowning as he attempted to prize off a bit of mould
that had attached itself firmly to his finger, "you wouldn't want to be stuck inside this house
without any company."
"He'll have company!" said Hermione. "It's Headquarters to the Order of the Phoenix, isn't it?
He just got his hopes up that Harry would be coming to live here with him."
"I don't think that's true" said Harry, wringing out his cloth. "He wouldn't give me a straight
answer when I asked him if I could."
"He just didn't want to get his own hopes up even more," said Hermione wisely. "And he
expelled. Then you'd both be outcasts together."
"Come off it!" said Harry and Ron together, but Hermione merely shrugged.
"Suit yourselves. But I sometimes think Ron's mums right and Sirius gets confused about whether you're you or your father, Harry."
"So you think he's touched in the head?" said Harry heatedly.
"No, I just think he's been very lonely for a long time," said Hermione simply.
"Still not finished?" she said, poking her head into the cupboard.
"I thought you might be here to tell us to have a break" said Ron bitterly. "D'you know how
much mould we've got rid of since we arrived here?"
"You were so keen to help the Order," said Mrs. Weasley, "you can do your bit by making
Headquarters fit to live in."
"I feel like a house-elf," grumbled Ron.
"Well, now you understand what dreadful lives they lead, perhaps you'll be a bit more active in
SPEW!" said Hermione hopefully, as Mrs. Weasley left them to it. "You know, maybe it
awareness as well as funds."
"I'll sponsor you to shut up about SPEW," Ron muttered irritably, but only so Harry could hear
"Booklists have arrived," he said, throwing one of the envelopes up to Harry, who was standing
on a chair. "About time, I thought they'd forgotten, they usually come much earlier than this..."
"Only two new ones," he said, reading the list, "The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 5, by
Miranda Goshawk, and Defensive Magical Theory, by Wilbert Slinkhard."
"We were just wondering who assigned the Slinkhard book," said Fred conversationally.
"Because it means Dumbledore's found a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher," said
"And about time too," said Fred.
"What d'you mean?" Harry asked, jumping down beside them.
"Well, we overheard Mum and Dad talking on the Extendable Ears a few weeks back," Fred told
Harry, "and from what they were saying, Dumbledore was having real trouble finding anyone to
do the job this year."
"Not surprising, is it, when you look at what's happened to the last four?" said George.
"One sacked, one dead, one's memory removed and one locked in a trunk for nine months," said
Harry, counting them off on his fingers. "Yeah, I see what you mean."
"What's up with you, Ron?" asked Fred.
"What's the matter?" said Fred impatiently, moving around Ron to look over his shoulder at the
"Prefect?" he said, staring incredulously at the letter. "Prefect?"
"No way," said George in a hushed voice.
"There's been a mistake," said Fred, snatching the letter out of Ron's grasp and holding it up to
the light as though checking for a watermark. "No one in their right mind would make Ron a
prefect."
"We thought you were a cert!" said Fred, in a tone that suggested Harry had tricked them in some way.
"We thought Dumbledore was bound to pick you!" said George indignantly.
"Winning the Triwizard and everything!" said Fred.
"I suppose all the mad stuff must've counted against him," said George to Fred.
"Yeah," said Fred slowly. "Yeah, you've caused too much trouble, mate. Well, at least one of
you's got their priorities right."
"Prefect... ickle Ronnie the Prefect."
"Oh, Mum's going to be revolting," groaned George, thrusting the prefect badge back at Ron as
"Did you - did you get -?"
"I knew it!' she said excitedly, brandishing her letter. "Me too, Harry, me too!"
"No," said Harry quickly, pushing the badge back into Ron's hand. "It's Ron, not me."
"It - what?"
"Ron's prefect, not me," Harry said.
"Ron?" said Hermione, her jaw dropping. "But... are you sure? I mean -"
"It's my name on the letter," he said.
"I..." said Hermione, looking thoroughly bewildered. "I... well... wow! Well done, Ron! That's
really -"
"Unexpected," said George, nodding.
"No," said Hermione, blushing harder than ever, "no it's not... Ron's done loads of... he's
really..."
"Ginny said the booklists had come at last," she said, glancing around at all the envelopes as she
made her way over to the bed and started sorting the robes into two piles. "If you give them to
fast you're growing... what color would you like?"
"Get him red and gold to match his badge," said George, smirking.
"Match his what?" said Mrs. Weasley absently, rolling up a pair of maroon socks and placing
"His badge," said Fred, with the air of getting the worst over quickly. "His lovely shiny
new prefect's badge."
"His... but... Ron, you're not...?"
"I don't believe it! I don't believe it! Oh, Ron, how wonderful! A prefect! That's everyone in the
family!"
"What are Fred and I, next-door neighbors?" said George indignantly, as his mother pushed him
"Wait until your father hears! Ron, I'm so proud of you, what wonderful news, you could end up
all this worry, I'm just thrilled, oh, Ronnie --"
"Mum... don't... Mum, get a grip..." he muttered, trying to push her away.
She let go of him and said breathlessly, "Well, what will it be? We gave Percy an owl, but you've already got one, of course."
"W-what do you mean?" said Ron, looking as though he did not dare believe his ears.
"You've got to have a reward for this!" said Mrs. Weasley fondly. "How about a nice new set of
dress robes?"
"We've already bought him some," said Fred sourly, who looked as though he sincerely regretted this generosity.
"Or a new cauldron, Charlie's old one's rusting through, or a new rat, you always liked Scabbers"
"Mum," said Ron hopefully, "can I have a new broom?"
"Not a really good one!" Ron hastened to add. "Just - just a new one for a change..."
"Of course you can... well, I'd better get going if I've got a broom to buy too. I'll see you all
a dither!"
"You don't mind if we don't kiss you, do you, Ron?" said Fred in a falsely anxious voice.
"We could curtsey, if you like," said George.
"Oh, shut up," said Ron, scowling at them.
"Or what?" said Fred, an evil grin spreading across his face. "Going to put us in detention?"
"I'd love to see him try," sniggered George.
"He could if you don't watch out!" said Hermione angrily.
Fred and George burst out laughing, and Ron muttered, "Drop it, Hermione."
"We're going to have to watch our step, George," said Fred, pretending to tremble, "with these
two on our case..."
"Yeah, it looks like our law-breaking days are finally over," said George, shaking his head.
"Those two!" said Hermione furiously, staring up at the ceiling, through which they could now
hear Fred and George roaring with laughter in the room upstairs. "Don't pay any attention to
them, Ron, they're only jealous!"
"I don't think they are," said Ron doubtfully, also looking up at the ceiling. "They've always said only prats become prefects... still," he added on a happier note, "they've never had new brooms! I wish I could go with Mum and choose... she'll never be able to afford a Nimbus, but there's the new Cleansweep out, that'd be great... yeah, I think I'll go and tell her I like the Cleansweep, just so she knows."
"Harry?" said Hermione tentatively.
"Well done, Hermione," said Harry, so heartily it did not sound like his voice at all, and, still not
looking at her, "brilliant. Prefect. Great."
"Thanks," said Hermione. "Erm - Harry - could I borrow Hedwig so I can tell Mum and Dad?
They'll be really pleased - I mean prefect is something they can understand."
"Yeah, no problem," said Harry, still in the horrible hearty voice that did not belong to him.
"Take her!"
what Fred had said: "No one in their right mind would make Ron a prefect..."
"Just caught her!" he said happily. "She says she'll get the Cleansweep if she can."
"Cool," Harry said, and he was relieved to hear that his voice had stopped sounding hearty.
"Listen - Ron - well done, mate."
"I never thought it would be me!" he said, shaking his head. "I thought it would be you!"
"Nah, I've caused too much trouble," Harry said, echoing Fred.
"Yeah," said Ron, "yeah, I suppose... well, we'd better get our trunks packed, hadn't we?"
"Never mind unwrapping it now, people are arriving for dinner, I want you all downstairs," she
"I thought we'd have a little party, not a sit-down dinner," she told Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred,
George and Ginny as they entered the room. "Your father and Bill are on their way, Ron. I've
sent them both owls and they're thrilled," she added, beaming.
"Oh, Alastor, I am glad you're here," said Mrs. Weasley brightly, as Mad-Eye shrugged off his
traveling cloak. "We've been wanting to ask you for ages - could you have a look in the writing
it's something really nasty."
"No problem, Molly..."
"Drawing room..." he growled, as the pupil contracted. "Desk in the corner? Yeah, I see it...
yeah, it's a Boggart... want me to go up and get rid of it, Molly?"
"No, no, I'll do it myself later," beamed Mrs. Weasley, "you have your drink. We're having a
little bit of a celebration, actually..." She gesture d at the scarlet banner. "Fourth prefect in the
family!" she said fondly, ruffling Ron's hair.
"Prefect, eh?" growled Moody, his normal eye on Ron and his magical eye swiveling around to
"Well, congratulations," said Moody, still glaring at Ron with his normal eye, "authority figures
he wouldn't have appointed you..."
"Well, I think a toast is in order," said Mr. Weasley, when everyone had a drink. He raised his
goblet. "To Ron and Hermione, the new Gryffindor prefects!"
"I was never a prefect myself," said Tonks brightly from behind Harry as everybody moved
she looked like Ginny's older sister. "My Head of House said I lacked certain necessary
qualities."
"Like what?" said Ginny, who was choosing a baked potato.
"Like the ability to behave myself," said Tonks.
"What about you, Sirius?" Ginny asked, thumping Hermione on the back.
"No one would have made me a prefect, I spent too much time in detention with James. Lupin
was the good boy, he got the badge."
"I think Dumbledore might have hoped I would be able to exercise some control over my best
friends," said Lupin. "I need scarcely say that I failed dismally."
"... nought to seventy in ten seconds, not bad, is it? When you think the Comet Two Ninety's
only nought to sixty and that's with a decent tailwind according to Which Broomstick?"
"I mean, it's the same kind of nonsense as werewolf segregation, isn't it? It all stems from this
horrible thing wizards have of thinking they're superior to other creatures..."
"... getting really out of hand, and you're so good-looking, it would look much better shorter,
wouldn't it, Harry?"
"Oh - I dunno -" said Harry, slightly alarmed at being asked his opinion; he slid away from them
"It's okay," he told Mundungus, "we can trust Harry, he's our financial backer."
"Look what Dung's got us," said George, holding out his hand to Harry. It was full of what
"Venomous Tentacula seeds," said George. "We need them for the Skiving Snackboxes but
them."
"Ten Galleons the lot, then Dung?" said Fred.
"Wiv all the trouble I went to to get 'em?" said Mundungus, his saggy, bloodshot eyes stretching
even wider. "I'm sorry, lads, but I'm not taking a Knut under twenty."
"Dung likes his little joke," Fred said to Harry.
"Yeah, his best one so far has been six Sickles for a bag of Knarl quills," said George.
"Be careful," Harry warned them quietly.
"What?" said Fred. "Mum's busy cooing over Prefect Ron, we're okay."
"But Moody could have his eye on you," Harry pointed out.
"Good point, that," he grunted. "All right, lads, ten it is, if you'll take 'em quick."
"Cheers, Harry!" said Fred delightedly, when Mundungus had emptied his pockets into the twins' outstretched hands and scuttled off towards the food. "We'd better get these upstairs..."
"... why Dumbledore didn't make Potter a prefect?" said Kingsley.
"He'll have had his reasons," replied Lupin.
"But it would've shown confidence in him. It's what I'd've done," persisted Kingsley, "specially
with the Daily Prophet having a go at him every few days..."
"... the handles made of Spanish oak with anti-jinx varnish and in-built vibration control -" Ron
"Well, I think I'll sort out that Boggart before I turn in... Arthur, I don't want this lot up too late,
all right? Night, Harry, dear."
"You all right, Potter?" grunted Moody.
"Yeah, fine," lied Harry.
"Come here, I've got something that might interest you," he said.
"Original Order of the Phoenix," growled Moody. "Found it last night when I was looking for my spare Invisibility Cloak, seeing as Podmore hasn't had the manners to return my best one...
thought people might like to see it."
"There's me," said Moody, unnecessarily pointing at himself. The Moody in the picture was
unmistakable, though his hair was slightly less grey and his nose was intact. "And there's
Longbottom -"
"-- poor devils," growled Moody. "Better dead than what happened to them... and that's
copped it too, we only ever found bits of him... shift aside there," he added, poking the picture,
"That's Edgar Bones... brother of Amelia Bones, they got him and his family, too, he was a great wizard... Sturgis Podmore, blimey, he looks young... Caradoc Dearborn, vanished six months after this, we never found his body... Hagrid, of course, looks exactly the same as ever...
budge along..."
"That's Dumbledore's brother Aberforth, only time I ever met him, strange bloke... that's
and... there you go, thought that would interest you!"
"Eh?" said Moody.
"Yeah," said Harry, once again attempting to grin. "Er... listen, I've just remembered, I haven't
packed my..."
He was spared the trouble of inventing an object he had not packed. Sirius had just said, "What's
that you've got there, Mad-Eye?" and Moody had turned towards him. Harry crossed the kitchen, slipped through the door and up the stairs before anyone could call him back.
"Hello?" Harry said.
"Mrs. Weasley?" Harry croaked.
"R - r - riddikulus!" Mrs. Weasley sobbed, pointing her shaking wand at Ron's body.
"R -riddikulus!" she sobbed again.
"No!" Mrs. Weasley moaned. "No... riddikulus! Riddikulus! RIDDlKULUS"
"Mrs. Weasley, just get out of here!" shouted Harry, staring down at his own dead body on the
floor. "Let someone else -"
"What's going on?"
"Riddikulus!"
"Oh - oh - oh!" gulped Mrs. Weasley, and she broke into a storm of crying, her face in her hands.
"Molly," said Lupin bleakly, walking over to her. "Molly don't..."
"Molly, it was just a Boggart," he said soothingly, patting her on the head, "just a stupid
Boggart..."
"I see them d-d - dead all the time!" Mrs. Weasley moaned into his shoulder. "All the't -'t - time!
I d - d - dream about it..."
"D-d - don't tell Arthur," Mrs. Weasley was gulping now, mopping her eyes frantically with her
cuffs. "I d - d - don't want him to know... being silly..."
"Harry, I'm so sorry. What must you think of me?" she said shakily. "Not even able to get rid of a Boggart..."
"Don't be stupid," said Harry, trying to smile.
"I'm just's -'s - so worried," she said, tears spilling out of her eyes again. "Half the f - f - family's in the Order, it'll b - b - be a miracle if we all come through this... and P - P - Percy's not talking to us... what if something d-d - dreadful happens and we've never m - m - made it up with him? And what's going to happen if Arthur and I get killed, who's g - g - going to look after Ron and Ginny?"
"Molly that's enough" said Lupin firmly. "This isn't like last time. The Order are better prepared, we've got a head start, we know what Voldemorts up to -"
"Oh, Molly, come on, it's about time you got used to hearing his name - look, I can't promise no
twenty to one by the Death Eaters and they were picking us off one by one..."
"Don't worry about Percy" said Sirius abruptly. "He'll come round. It's only a matter of time
us to forgive them. And I'm not sure I'll be accepting their apology," he added bitterly.
"And as for who's going to look after Ron and Ginny if you and Arthur died," said Lupin,
smiling slightly, "what do you think we'd do, let them starve?"
"Being silly," she muttered again, mopping her eyes.
"Cut it out," he said firmly, rubbing the scar as the pain receded.
"First sign of madness, talking to your own head," said a sly voice from the empty picture on the
"... better hurry up, Mum's going ballistic, she says we're going to miss the train."
"- COULD HAVE DONE HER A SERIOUS INJURY, YOU IDIOTS -"
"- FILTHY HALF-BREEDS, BESMIRCHING THE HOUSE OF MY FATHERS -"
"Mum and Dad just sent Hedwig back." The owl fluttered obligingly over and perched on top of
her cage. "Are you ready yet?"
"Nearly. Is Ginny all right?" Harry asked, shoving on his glasses.
"Mrs. Weasley's patched her up," said Hermione. "But now Mad-Eye's complaining that we
"Guard?" said Harry. "We have to go to King's Cross with a guard?"
"You have to go to King's Cross with a guard," Hermione corrected him.
"Why?" said Harry irritably. "I thought Voldemort was supposed to be lying low, or are you
telling me he's going to jump out from behind a dustbin to try and do me in?"
"I don't know, it's just what Mad-Eye says," said Hermione distractedly, looking at her watch,
"but if we don't leave soon we're definitely going to miss the train..."
"WILL YOU LOT GET DOWN HERE NOW, PLEASE!" Mrs. Weasley bellowed and Hermione jumped as though scalded and hurried out of the room. Harry seized Hedwig, stuffed her unceremoniously into her cage, and set off downstairs after Hermione, dragging his trunk.
"Harry, you're to come with me and Tonks," shouted Mrs. Weasley - over the repeated screeches
of "MUDBLOODS! SCUM! CREATURES OF DIRT!" - "Leave your trunk and your owl,
Alastor's going to deal with the luggage... oh, for heaven's sake, Sirius, Dumbledore said no!"
"Oh honestly..." said Mrs. Weasley despairingly. "Well, on your own head be it!'
"Where's Tonks?" Harry said, looking round as they went down the stone steps of number twelve, which vanished the moment they reached the pavement.
"She's waiting for us just up here," said Mrs. Weasley stiffly, averting her eyes from the
"Wotcher, Harry," she said, winking. "Better hurry up, hadn't we, Molly?" she added, checking
"I know, I know," moaned Mrs. Weasley, lengthening her stride, "but Mad-Eye wanted to wait
without magic."
"I hope the others make it in time," said Mrs. Weasley anxiously, staring behind her at the
"Nice dog, Harry!" called a tall boy with dreadlocks.
"Thanks, Lee," said Harry, grinning, as Sirius wagged his tail frantically.
"Oh good," said Mrs. Weasley, sounding relieved, "here's Alastor with the luggage, look..."
"All okay," he muttered to Mrs. Weasley and Tonks, "don't think we were followed..."
"No trouble?" growled Moody.
"Nothing," said Lupin.
"I'll still be reporting Sturgis to Dumbledore," said Moody, "that's the second time he's not
turned up in a week. Getting as unreliable as Mundungus."
"Well, look after yourselves," said Lupin, shaking hands all round. He reached Harry last and
gave him a clap on the shoulder. "You too Harry. Be careful."
"Yeah, keep your head down and your eyes peeled," said Moody, shaking Harry's hand too.
"And don't forget, all of you - careful what you put in writing. If in doubt, don't put it in a letter at all."
"It's been great meeting all of you," said Tonks, hugging Hermione and Ginny "We'll see you
soon, I expect."
"Quick, quick," said Mrs. Weasley distractedly, hugging them at random and catching Harry
twice. "Write... be good... if you've forgotten anything we'll send it on... on to the train, now,
hurry..."
Harry's shoulders, but Mrs. Weasley shoved Harry away towards the train door, hissing, "For
heaven's sake, act more like a dog, Sirius!"
"See you!" Harry called out of the open window as the train began to move, while Ron,
"He shouldn't have come with us," said Hermione in a worried voice.
"Oh, lighten up," said Ron, "he hasn't seen daylight for months, poor bloke."
"Well," said Fred, clapping his hands together, "can't stand around chatting all day, we've got
business to discuss with Lee. See you later," and he and George disappeared down the corridor to
"Shall we go and find a compartment, then?" Harry asked.
"Er," said Ron.
"We're - well - Ron and I are supposed to go into the prefect carriage," Hermione said
"Oh," said Harry. "Right. Fine."
"I don't think we'll have to stay there all journey," said Hermione quickly. "Our letters said we
just get instructions from the Head Boy and Girl and then patrol the corridors from time to time."
"Fine," said Harry again. "Well, I - I might see you later, then."
"Yeah, definitely," said Ron, casting a shifty, anxious look at Harry. "It's a pain having to go
down there, I'd rather - but we have to -I mean, I'm not enjoying it, I'm not Percy," he finished
"I know you're not," said Harry and he grinned. But as Hermione and Ron dragged their trunks,
"Come on," Ginny told him, "if we get a move on we'll be able to save them places."
"Right," said Harry, picking up Hedwig's cage in one hand and the handle of his trunk in the
"Hi, Harry" he panted. "Hi, Ginny... everywhere's full... I can't find a seat..."
"What are you talking about?" said Ginny, who had squeezed past Neville to peer into the
compartment behind him. "There's room in this one, there's only Loony Lovegood in here --"
"Don't be silly," said Ginny, laughing, "she's all right."
"Hi, Luna," said Ginny, "is it okay if we take these seats?"
"Thanks," said Ginny, smiling at her.
"Had a good summer, Luna?" Ginny asked.
"Yes," said Luna dreamily, without taking her eyes off Harry. "Yes, it was quite enjoyable, you
know. You're Harry Potter," she added.
"I know I am," said Harry.
"And I don't know who you are."
"I'm nobody," said Neville hurriedly.
"No you're not," said Ginny sharply. "Neville Longbottom - Luna Lovegood. Luna's in my year, but in Ravenclaw."
"Wit beyond measure is man's greatest treasure," said Luna in a singsong voice.
"Guess what I got for my birthday?" said Neville.
"Another Remembrall?" said Harry, remembering the marble-like device Neville's grandmother
"No," said Neville. "I could do with one, though, I lost the old one ages ago... no, look at this..."
"Mimbulus mimbletonia," he said proudly.
"It's really, really rare," said Neville, beaming. "I don't know if there's one in the greenhouse at
in Assyria. I'm going to see if I can breed from it."
"Does it - er - do anything?" he asked.
"Loads of stuff!" said Neville proudly. "It's got an amazing defensive mechanism. Here, hold
Trevor for me..."
"S - sorry," he gasped. "I haven't tried that before... didn't realize it would be quite so... don't
worry, though, Stinksap's not poisonous," he added nervously, as Harry spat a mouthful on to the floor.
"Oh... hello, Harry," said a nervous voice. "Um... bad time?"
"Oh... hi," said Harry blankly.
"Um..." said Cho. "Well... just thought I'd say hello... bye then."
"Never mind," said Ginny bracingly. "Look, we can easily get rid of all this." She pulled out her
wand. "Scourgify!"
"Sorry," said Neville again, in a small voice.
"I'm starving," said Ron, stowing Pigwidgeon next to Hedwig, grabbing a Chocolate Frog from
"Well, there are two fifth-year prefects from each house," said Hermione, looking thoroughly
disgruntled as she took her seat. "Boy and girl from each."
"And guess who's a Slytherin prefect?" said Ron, still with his eyes closed.
"Malfoy," replied Harry at once, certain his worst fear would be confirmed.
"Course," said Ron bitterly, stuffing the rest of the Frog into his mouth and taking another.
"And that complete cow Pansy Parkinson," said Hermione viciously. "How she got to be a prefect when she's thicker than a concussed troll..."
"Who's Hufflepuff?" Harry asked.
"Ernie Macmillan and Hannah Abbott," said Ron thickly.
"And Anthony Goldstein and Padma Patil for Ravenclaw," said Hermione.
"You went to the Yule Ball with Padma Patil," said a vague voice.
"Yeah, I know I did," he said, looking mildly surprised.
"She didn't enjoy it very much," Luna informed him. "She doesn't think you treated her very
well, because you wouldn't dance with her. I don't think I'd have minded," she added
thoughtfully, "I don't like dancing very much."
"We're supposed to patrol the corridors every so often," he told Harry and Neville, "and we can
something."
"You're not supposed to abuse your position, Ron!" said Hermione sharply.
"Yeah, right, because Malfoy won't abuse it at all," said Ron sarcastically.
"So you're going to descend to his level?"
"No, I'm just going to make sure I get his mates before he gets mine."
"For heaven's sake, Ron -"
"I'll make Goyle do lines, it'll kill him, he hates writing," said Ron happily. He lowered his voice to Goyle's low grunt and, screwing up his face in a look of pained concentration, mimed writing in midair. "I... must... not... look... like... a... baboon's... backside."
"That was funny!"
"Are you taking the mickey?" said Ron, frowning at her.
"Baboon's... backside!" she choked, holding her ribs.
"Can I have a look at this?" Harry asked Luna eagerly.
"What people don't realize is that Sirius Black is a false name," says Mrs. Purkiss. "The man
people believe to be Sirius Black is actually Stubby Boardman, lead singer of popular singing group The Hobgoblins, who retired fro m public life after being struck on the ear by a turnip at a concert in Little Norton Church Hall nearly fifteen years ago. I recognized him the moment I saw his picture in the paper. Now, Stubby couldn't possibly have committed those crimes, because on the day in question he happened to be enjoying a romantic candlelit dinner with me. I have written to the Minister for Magic and am expecting him to give Stubby, alias - Sirius, a full pardon any day now."
"It wouldn't be the first time, either," said a Ministry insider. "Cornelius 'Goblin-Crusher' Fudge, that's what his friends call him. If you could hear him when he thinks no one's listening, oh, he's always talking about the goblins he's had done in; he's had them drowned, he's had them dropped off buildings, he's had them poisoned, he's had them cooked in pies..."
"Anything good in there?" asked Ron as Harry closed the magazine.
"Of course not," said Hermione scathingly, before Harry could answer. "The Quibbler's rubbish,
everyone knows that."
"Excuse me," said Luna; her voice had suddenly lost its dreamy quality. "My father's the editor."
"I - oh," said Hermione, looking embarrassed. "Well, it's got some interesting... I mean, it's
quite..."
"I'll have it back, thank you," said Luna coldly, and leaning forwards she snatched it out of
"What?" he said aggressively, before Malfoy could open his mouth.
"Manners, Potter, or I'll have to give you a detention," drawled Malfoy, whose sleek blond hair
and pointed chin were just like his fathers. "You see, I, unlike you, have been made a prefect,
which means that I, unlike you, have the power to hand out punishments."
"Yeah," said Harry, "but you, unlike me, are a git, so get out and leave us alone."
"Tell me, how does it feel being second-best to Weasley, Potter?" he asked.
"Shut up, Malfoy," said Hermione sharply.
"I seem to have touched a nerve," said Malfoy, smirking. "Well, just watch yourself, Potter,
because I'll be dogging your footsteps in case you step out of line."
"Get out!" said Hermione, standing up.
"Chuck us another Frog," said Ron, who had clearly noticed nothing.
"We'd better change," said Hermione at last, and all of them opened their trunks with difficulty
"I'll carry that owl, if you like, " said Luna to Harry, reaching out for Pigwidgeon as Neville
"Oh - er - thanks, " said Harry, handing her the cage and hoisting Hedwig's more securely into his arms.
around, listening for the familiar call of "firs'-years over 'ere... firs'-years..."
But it did not come. Instead, a quite different voice, a brisk female one, was calling out, "First years line up over here, please! All first-years to me!"
"Where's Hagrid?" he said out loud.
"I don't know," said Ginny, "but we'd better get out of the way, we're blocking the door."
"Oh, yeah..."
"Where's Pig?" said Ron's voice, right behind Harry.
"That Luna girl was carrying him," said Harry, turning quickly, eager to consult Ron about
Hagrid. "Where d'you reckon -"
"- Hagrid is? I dunno," said Ron, sounding worried. "He'd better be okay..."
"Malfoy was being absolutely foul to a first-year back there. I swear I'm going to report him,
where's Crookshanks?"
"Ginny's got him," said Harry. "There she is..."
"Thanks," said Hermione, relieving Ginny of the cat. "Come on, let's get a carriage together
before they all fill up..."
"I haven't got Pig yet!" Ron said, but Hermione was already heading off towards the nearest
"What are those things, d'you reckon?" he asked Ron, nodding at the horrible horses as the other
"What things?"
"Those horse -"
"Here you are," she said. "He's a sweet little owl, isn't he?"
"Er... yeah... he's all right," said Ron gruffly. "Well, come on then, let's get in... what were you
saying, Harry?"
"I was saying, what are those horse things?" Harry said, as he, Ron and Luna made for the
"What horse things?"
"The horse things pulling the carriages!" said Harry impatiently. They were, after all, about three
"What are you talking about?"
"I'm talking about - look!"
"What am I supposed to be looking at?"
"At the - there, between the shafts! Harnessed to the coach! It's right there in front -"
"Can't... can't you see them?"
"See what?"
"Can't you see what's pulling the carriages?"
"Are you feeling all right, Harry?"
"I... yeah..."
"Shall we get in, then?" said Ron uncertainly, looking at Harry as though worried about him.
"Yeah," said Harry. "Yeah, go on..."
"It's all right," said a dreamy voice from beside Harry as Ron vanished into the coach's dark
interior. "You're not going mad or anything. I can see them, too."
"Can you?" said Harry desperately, turning to Luna. He could see the bat-winged horses reflected in her wide silvery eyes.
"Oh, yes," said Luna, "I've been able to see them ever since my first day here. They've always
pulled the carriages. Don't worry. You're just as sane as I am"
"Did everyone see that Grubbly-Plank woman?" asked Ginny. "What's she doing back here?
Hagrid can't have left, can he?"
"I'll be quite glad if he has," said Luna, "he isn't a very good teacher, is he?"
"Yes, he is!" said Harry, Ron and Ginny angrily.
Harry glared at Hermione. She cleared her throat and quickly said, "Erm... yes... he's very
good."
"Well, we in Ravenclaw think he's a bit of a joke," said Luna, unfazed.
"You've got a rubbish sense of humor then," Ron snapped, as the wheels below them creaked
"Are you coming or what" said Ron beside him.
"Oh... yeah," said Harry quickly and they joined the crowd hurrying up the stone steps into the
"He's not there."
"He can't have left," said Ron, sounding slightly anxious.
"Of course he hasn't," said Harry firmly.
"You don't think he's... hurt, or anything, do you?" said Hermione uneasily.
"No," said Harry at once.
"But where is he, then?"
hear, "Maybe he's not back yet. You know - from his mission - the thing he was doing over the
"Yeah... yeah, that'll be it," said Ron, sounding reassured, but Hermione bit her lip, looking up
"Who's that?" she said sharply, pointing towards the middle of the staff table.
"It's that Umbridge woman!"
"Who?" said Hermione.
"She was at my hearing, she works for Fudge!"
"Nice cardigan," said Ron, smirking.
"She works for Fudge!" Hermione repeated, frowning. "What on earth's she doing here, then?"
"Dunno..."
"No," she muttered, "no, surely not..."
"Together we will build and teach!"
Said Slytherin, "We'll teach just those whose
Ancestry is purest."
Said Ravenclaw, "We'll teach those whose
Intelligence is surest."
Said Gryffindor, "We'll teach all those
With brave deeds to their name."
Said Hufflepuff, "I'll teach the lot,
And treat them just the same."
"Branched out a bit this year, hasn't it?" said Ron, his eyebrows raised.
"Too right it has," said Harry.
"I wonder if it's ever given warnings before?" said Hermione, sounding slightly anxious.
"Yes, indeed," said Nearly Headless Nick knowledgeably, leaning across Neville towards her
(Neville winced; it was very uncomfortable to have a ghost lean through you). "The Hat feels
itself honor-bound to give the school due warning whenever it feels -"
"Abercrombie, Euan."
"Gryffindor!"
Hat's decisions, Harry could hear Ron's stomach rumbling loudly. Finally, "Zeller, Rose" was
"To our newcomers," said Dumbledore in a ringing voice, his arms stretched wide and a beaming smile on his lips, "welcome! To our old hands - welcome back! There is a time for speechmaking, but this is not it. Tuck in!"
"Excellent," said Ron, with a kind of groan of longing, and he seized the nearest plate of chops
"What were you saying before the Sorting?" Hermione asked the ghost. "About the Hat giving
warnings?"
"Oh, yes," said Nick, who seemed glad of a reason to turn away from Ron, who was now eating
roast potatoes with almost indecent enthusiasm. "Yes, I have heard the Hat give several warnings
course, its advice is the same: stand together, be strong from within."
"Ow kunnit nofe skusin danger ifzat?" said Ron.
"I beg your pardon?" said Nearly Headless Nick politely, while Hermione looked revolted. Ron
gave an enormous swallow and said, "How can it know if the school's in danger if it's a Hat?"
"I have no idea," said Nearly Headless Nick. "Of course, it lives in Dumbledore's office, so I
daresay it picks things up there."
"And it wants all the houses to be friends?" said Harry, looking over at the Slytherin table, where
Draco Malfoy was holding court. "Fat chance."
"Well, now, you shouldn't take that attitude," said Nick reprovingly. "Peaceful cooperation,
an argument with the Bloody Baron."
"Only because you're terrified of him," said Ron.
"Terrified? I hope I, Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington, have never been guilty of cowardice in
my life! The noble blood that runs in my veins -"
"What blood?" asked Ron. "Surely you haven't still got -?"
"Its a figure of speech!" said Nearly Headless Nick, now so annoyed his head was trembling
ominously on his partially severed neck. "I assume I am still allowed to enjoy the use of
quite used to students poking fun at my death, I assure you!"
"Nick, he wasn't really laughing at you!" said Hermione, throwing a furious look at Ron.
"Node iddum eentup sechew," which Nick did not seem to think constituted an adequate apology.
"Well done, Ron," snapped Hermione.
"What?" said Ron indignantly, having managed, finally, to swallow his food. "I'm not allowed to
ask a simple question?"
"Oh, forget it," said Hermione irritably, and the pair of them spent the rest of the meal in huffy
"Well, now that we are all digesting another magnificent feast, I beg a few moments of your
attention for the usual start-of-term notices," said Dumbledore. "First-years ought to know that
know by now, too." (Harry, Ron and Hermione exchanged smirks.)
"Mr. Filch, the caretaker, has asked me, for what he tells me is the four-hundred-and-sixty second time, to remind you all that magic is not permitted in corridors between classes, nor are a
"We have had two changes in staffing this year. We are very pleased to welcome back Professor
introduce Professor Umbridge, our new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher."
Dumbledore continued, "Tryouts for the house Quidditch teams will take place on the -"
but then Professor Umbridge cleared her throat, "Hem, hem," and it became clear that she had got to her feet and was intending to make a speech.
"Thank you, Headmaster," Professor Umbridge simpered, "for those kind words of welcome."
("hem, hem") and continued.
"Well, it is lovely to be back at Hogwarts, I must say!" She smiled, revealing very pointed teeth.
"And to see such happy little faces looking up at me!"
"I am very much looking forward to getting to know you all and I'm sure we'll be very good
friends!"
"I'll be her friend as long as I don't have to borrow that cardigan," Parvati whispered to
Professor Umbridge cleared her throat again ("hem, hem"), but when she continued, some of the
"The Ministry of Magic has always considered the education of young witches and wizards to be
called to the noble profession of teaching."
Professor Sprout as Umbridge gave another little "hem, hem" and went on with her speech.
"Every headmaster and headmistress of Hogwarts has brought something new to the weighty task of governing this historic school, and that is as it should be, for without progress there will be stagnation and decay. There again, progress for progress's sake must be discouraged, for our
between permanence and change, between tradition and innovation..."
"... because some changes will be for the better, while others will come, in the fullness of time,
ought to be prohibited."
"Thank you very much, Professor Umbridge, that was most illuminating," he said, bowing to her. "Now, as I was saying, Quidditch tryouts will be held..."
"Yes, it certainly was illuminating," said Hermione in a low voice.
"You're not telling me you enjoyed it?" Ron said quietly, turning a glazed face towards
Hermione. "That was about the dullest speech I've ever heard, and I grew up with Percy."
"I said illuminating, not enjoyable," said Hermione. "It explained a lot.'
"Did it" said Harry in surprise. "Sounded like a load of waffle to me."
"There was some important stuff hidden in the waffle," said Hermione grimly.
"Was there?" said Ron blankly.
"How about: 'progress for progress's sake must be discouraged'? How about: 'pruning wherever we find practices that ought to be prohibited'?"
"Well, what does that mean?" said Ron impatiently.
"I'll tell you what it means," said Hermione through gritted teeth. "It means the Ministry's
interfering at Hogwarts."
"Ron, we're supposed to show the first-years where to go!"
"Oh yeah," said Ron, who had obviously forgotten. "Hey - hey, you lot! Midgets!"
"Ron!"
"Well, they are, they're titchy..."
"I know, but you can't call them midgets! - First-years!" Hermione called commandingly along
the table. "This way, please!"
"See you later," he said dully to Ron and Hermione and he made his way out of the Great Hall
"Er..." he said glumly, staring up at the Fat Lady, who smoothed the folds of her pink satin dress
"No password, no entrance," she said loftily.
"Harry, I know it!" Someone panted up behind him and he turned to see Neville jogging towards
him. "Guess what it is? I'm actually going to be able to remember it for once -" He waved the
stunted little cactus he had shown them on the train. "Mimbulus mimbletonia!"
"Correct," said the Fat Lady, and her portrait swung open towards them like a door, revealing a
"Hi," he said, moving across to his own trunk and opening it.
"Hey, Harry," said Dean, who was putting on a pair of pajamas in the West Ham colors. "Good
holiday?"
"Not bad," muttered Harry, as a true account of his holiday would have taken most of the night to relate and he could not face it. "You?"
"Yeah, it was okay," chuckled Dean. "Better than Seamus's, anyway, he was just telling me."
"Why, what happened, Seamus?" Neville asked as he placed his Mimbulus mimbletonia tenderly
to Harry, "Me mam didn't want me to come back."
"What?" said Harry, pausing in the act of pulling off his robes.
"She didn't want me to come back to Hogwarts."
"But - why?" said Harry, astonished. He knew that Seamus's mother was a witch and could not
"Well," he said in a measured voice, "I suppose... because of you."
"What d'you mean?" said Harry quickly.
"Well," said Seamus again, still avoiding Harry's eye, "she... er... well, it's not just you, it's
Dumbledore, too..."
"She believes the Daily Prophet?" said Harry. "She thinks I'm a liar and Dumbledore's an old
fool?"
"Yeah, something like that."
Seamus said, "Look... what did happen that night when... you know, when... with Cedric
Diggory and all?"
"What are you asking me for?" Harry retorted. "Just read the Daily Prophet like your mother, why don't you? That'll tell you all you need to know."
"Don't you have a go at my mother," Seamus snapped.
"I'll have a go at anyone who calls me a liar," said Harry.
"Don't talk to me like that!"
"I'll talk to you how I want," said Harry, his temper rising so fast he snatched his wand back
from his bedside table. "If you've got a problem sharing a dormitory with me, go and ask
McGonagall if you can be moved... stop your mummy worrying -"
"Leave my mother out of this, Potter!"
"What's going on?"
"He's having a go at my mother!" Seamus yelled.
"What?" said Ron. "Harry wouldn't do that -- we met your mother, we liked her..."
"That's before she started believing every word the stinking Daily Prophet writes about me!" said Harry at the top of his voice.
"Oh," said Ron, comprehension dawning across his freckled face. "Oh... right."
"You know what?" said Seamus heatedly, casting Harry a venomous look. "He's right, I don't
want to share a dormitory with him any more, he's a madman."
"That's out of order, Seamus," said Ron, whose ears were starting to glow red - always a danger
"Out of order, am I?" shouted Seamus, who in contrast with Ron was tuning paler. "You believe all the rubbish he's come out with about You-Know-Who, do you, you reckon he's telling the
truth?"
"Yeah, I do!" said Ron angrily.
"Then you're mad, too," said Seamus in disgust.
"Yeah? Well, unfortunately for you, pal, I'm also a prefect!" said Ron, jabbing himself in the
chest with a finger. "So unless you want detention, watch your mouth!"
"Anyone else's parents got a problem with Harry?" he said aggressively.
"My parents are Muggles, mate," said Dean, shrugging. "They don't know nothing about no
deaths at Hogwarts, because I'm not stupid enough to tell them."
"You don't know my mother, she'd weasel anything out of anyone!" Seamus snapped at him.
"Anyway your parents don't get the Daily Prophet. They don't know our Headmaster's been
his marbles -"
"My gran says that's rubbish," piped up Neville. "She says it's the Daily Prophet that's going
downhill, not Dumbledore. She's cancelled our subscription. We believe Harry" said Neville
Seamus. "My gran's always said You-Know-Who would come back one day. She says if
Dumbledore says he's back, he's back."
"Does he think he'll turn into a nutter if he stays in a room with me too long?" asked Harry loudly, as the hem of Seamus's robes whipped out of sight.
"Don't worry about it, Harry," Dean muttered, hoisting his schoolbag on to his shoulder, "he's
just..."
"What's the matter?" asked Hermione five minutes later, catching up with Harry and Ron halfway across the common room as they all headed towards breakfast. "You look absolutely - Oh for heaven's sake."
"They are the limit," said Hermione grimly, taking d own the sign, which Fred and George had
pinned up over a poster giving the date of the first Hogsmeade weekend in October. "We'll have to talk to them, Ron."
"Why?"
"Because we're prefects!" said Hermione, as they c l imbed out through the portrait hole. "It's up to us to stop this kind of thing!"
"Anyway, what's up, Harry?" Hermione continued, as they walked down a flight of stairs lined
own conversation. "You look really angry about something."
"Seamus reckons Harry's lying about You-Know-Who," said Ron succinctly, when Harry did not respond.
"Yes, Lavender thinks so too," she said gloomily.
"Been having a nice little chat with her about whet her or not I'm a lying, attention-seeking prat,
have you?" Harry said loudly.
"No," said Hermione calmly. "I told her to keep her big fat mouth shut about you, actually. And it would be quite nice if you stopped jumping down our throats, Harry, because in case you haven't noticed, Ron and I are on your side."
"Sorry," said Harry in a low voice.
"That's quite all right," said Hermione with dignity... Then she shook her head. "Don't you
remember what Dumbledore said at the last end-of-term feast?"
"About You-Know-Who. He said his 'gift for spreading discord and enmity is very great. We can fight it only by showing an equally strong bond of friendship and trust --'"
"How do you remember stuff like that?" asked Ron, looking at her in admiration.
"I listen, Ron," said Hermione, with a touch of asperity.
"So do I, but I still couldn't tell you exactly what -"
"The point," Hermione pressed on loudly, "is that this sort of thing is exactly what Dumbledore
--"
"And Harry got it right last night," retorted Ron. "If that means we're supposed to get matey with the Slytherins-fat chance."
"Well, I think it's a pity we're not trying for a bit of inter-house unity," said Hermione crossly.
"Yeah, we really ought to be trying to make friends with people like that," said Harry
"Dumbledore didn't even mention how long that Grubbly-Plank woman's staying," he said, as they made their way across to the Gryffindor table.
"Maybe..." said Hermione thoughtfully.
"What?" said both Harry and Ron together.
"Well... maybe he didn't want to draw attention to Hagrid not being here."
"What d'you mean, draw attention to it?" said Ron, half-laughing. "How could we not notice?"
"Hi, Angelina."
"Hi," she said briskly, "good summer?" And without waiting for an answer, "Listen, I've been made Gryffindor Quidditch Captain."
"Nice one," said Harry, grinning at her; he suspected Angelina's pep talks might not be as longwinded as Oliver Wood's had been, which could only be an improvement.
"Yeah, well, we need a new Keeper now Oliver's left. Tryouts are on Friday at five o'clock and I
want the whole team there, all right? Then we can see how the new personnel fit in."
"Okay," said Harry.
"I'd forgotten Wood had left," said Hermione vaguely as she sat down beside Ron and pulled a
plate of toast towards her. "I suppose that will make quite a difference to the team?"
"I s'pose," said Harry, taking the bench opposite. "He was a good Keeper..."
"Still, it won't hurt to have some new blood, will it?" said Ron.
"What are you still getting that for?" said Harry irritably, thinking of Seamus as Hermione placed a Knut in the leather pouch on the owl's leg and it took off again. "I'm not bothering... load of rubbish."
"It's best to know what the enemy is saying," said Hermione darkly, and she unfurled the
"Nothing," she said simply, rolling up the newspaper and laying it down by her plate. "Nothing
about you or Dumbledore or anything."
"Look at today!" groaned Ron. "History of Magic, double Potions, Divination and double Defense Against the Dark Arts... Binns, Snape, Trelawney and that Umbridge woman all in one day! I wish Fred and George'd hurry up and get those Skiving Snackboxes sorted..."
"Do mine ears deceive me?'" said Fred, arriving with George and squeezing on to the bench beside Harry. "Hogwarts prefects surely don't wish to skive off lessons?"
"Look what we've got today," said Ron grumpily, shoving his timetable under Fred's nose.
"That's the worst Monday I've ever seen."
"Fair point, little bro," said Fred, scanning the column. "You can have a bit of Nosebleed Nougat
cheap if you like."
"Why's it cheap?" said Ron suspiciously.
"Because you'll keep bleeding till you shrivel up, we haven't got an antidote yet," said George,
"Cheers," said Ron moodily, pocketing his timetable, "but I think I'll take the lessons."
"And speaking of your Skiving Snackboxes," said Hermione, eyeing Fred and George beadily,
"you can't advertise for testers on the Gryffindor noticeboard."
"Says who?" said George, looking astonished.
"Says me," said Hermione. "And Ron."
"Leave me out of it," said Ron hastily.
"You'll be singing a different tune soon enough, Hermione," said Fred, thickly buttering a
crumpet. "You're starting your fifth year, you'll be begging us for a Snackbox before long."
"And why would starting fifth year mean I want a Skiving Snackbox?" asked Hermione.
"Fifth year's OWL year," said George.
"So?"
"So you've got your exams coming up, haven't you? They'll be keeping your noses so hard to that grindstone they'll be rubbed raw," said Fred with satisfaction.
"Half our year had minor breakdowns coming up to OWLs," said George happily. "Tears and
tantrums... Patricia Stimpson kept coming over faint..."
"Kenneth Towler came out in boils, d'you remember?" said Fred reminiscently.
"That's 'cause you put Bulbadox powder in his pajamas," said George.
"Oh yeah," said Fred, grinning. "I'd forgotten... hard to keep track sometimes, isn't it?"
"Anyway, it's a nightmare of a year, the fifth," said George. "If you care about exam results,
anyway. Fred and I managed to keep our spirits up somehow."
"Yeah... you got, what was it, three OWLs each?" said Ron.
"Yep," said Fred unconcernedly. "But we feel our futures lie outside the world of academic
achievement."
"We seriously debated whether we were going to bother coming back for our seventh year," said
George brightly, "now that we've got-"
"- now that we've got our OWLs," George said hastily. "I mean, do we really need NEWTs? But
world's biggest prat."
"We're not going to waste our last year here, though," said Fred, looking affectionately around at
the Great Hall. "We're going to use it to do a bit of market research, find out exactly what the
research, then produce products to fit the demand."
"But where are you going to get the gold to start a joke shop?" Hermione asked skeptically.
"You're going to need all the ingredients and materials - and premises too, I suppose..."
down to retrieve it. He heard Fred say overhead, "Ask us no questions and we'll tell you no lies,
before Herbology."
"What did that mean?" said Hermione, looking from Harry to Ron. "'Ask us no questions... ' Does that mean they've already got some gold to start a joke shop?"
"You know, I've been wondering about that," said Ron, his brow furrowed. "They bought me a new set of dress robes this summer and I couldn't understand where they got the Galleons..."
"D'you reckon it's true this year's going to be really tough? Because of the exams?"
"Oh, yeah," said Ron. "Bound to be, isn't it? OWLs are really important, affect the jobs you can
choose what NEWTs you want to do next year."
"D'you know what you want to do after Hogwarts?" Harry asked the other two, as they left the
"Not really," said Ron slowly. "Except... well..."
"What?" Harry urged him.
'"Well, it'd be cool to be an Auror,'" said Ron in an off-hand voice.
"Yeah, it would," said Harry fervently.
"But they're, like, the elite," said Ron. "You've got to be really good. What about you, Hermione?"
"I don't know," she said. "I think I'd like to do something really worthwhile."
"An Auror's worthwhile!" said Harry.
"Yes, it is, but it's not the only worthwhile thing," said Hermione thoughtfully, "I mean, if I could take SPEW further..."
"How would it be," she asked them coldly, as they left the classroom for break (Binns drifting
away through the blackboard), "if I refused to lend you my notes this year?"
"We'd fail our OWL," said Ron. "If you want that on your conscience, Hermione..."
"Well, you'd deserve it," she snapped. "You don't even try to listen to him, do you?"
"We do try" said Ron. "We just haven't got your brains or your memory or your concentration -
you're just cleverer than we are - is it nice to rub it in?"
"Oh, don't give me that rubbish," said Hermione, but she looked slightly mollified as she led the
"Hello, Harry!"
"Hi," said Harry, feeling his face grow hot. At least you're not covered in Stinksap this time, he
"You got that stuff off, then?"
"Yeah," said Harry, trying to grin as though the memory of their last meeting was funny as
opposed to mortifying. "So, did you... er... have a good summer?"
Something seemed to tauten in her face, but she said, "Oh, it was all right, you know..."
"Is that a Tornados badge?" Ron demanded suddenly, pointing to the front of Cho's robes, where a sky-blue badge emblazoned with a double gold 'T' was pinned. "You don't support them, do you?"
"Yeah, I do," said Cho.
"Have you always supported them, or just since they started winning the league?" said Ron, in
"I've supported them since I was six," said Cho coolly. "Anyway... see you, Harry."
"You are so tactless!"
"What? I only asked her if -"
"Couldn't you tell she wanted to talk to Harry on her own?"
"So? She could've done, I wasn't stopping -"
"Why on earth were you attacking her about her Quidditch team?"
"Attacking? I wasn't attacking her, I was only -"
"Who cares if she supports the Tornados?"
"Oh, come on, half the people you see wearing those badges only bought them last season -"
"But what does it matter!"
"It means they're not real fans, they're just jumping on the bandwagon -"
"That's the bell," said Harry dully, because Ron and Hermione were bickering too loudly to hear
"Settle down," said Snape coldly, shutting the door behind him.
"Before we begin today's lesson," said Snape, sweeping over to his desk and staring around at
them all, "I think it appropriate to remind you that next June you will be sitting an important
scrape an 'Acceptable' in your OWL, or suffer my... displeasure."
"After this year, of course, many of you will cease studying with me," Snape went on. "I take only the very best into my NEWT Potions class, which means that some of us will certainly be saying goodbye."
"But we have another year to go before that happy moment of farewell," said Snape softly, "so,
"Today we will be mixing a potion that often comes up at Ordinary Wizarding Level: the
irreversible sleep, so you will need to pay close attention to what you are doing." On Harry's left,
Hermione sat up a little straighter, her expression one of utmost attention. "The ingredients and
method -" Snape flicked his wand "- are on the blackboard -" (they appeared there) "- you will find everything you need --" he flicked his wand again "- in the store cupboard --" (the door of the said cupboard sprang open) "- you have an hour and a half... start."
"A light silver vapour should now be rising from your potion," called Snape, with ten minutes left to go.
"Potter, what is this supposed to be?"
"The Draught of Peace," said Harry tensely.
"Tell me, Potter," said Snape softly, "can you read?"
"Yes, I can," said Harry, his fingers clenched tightly around his wand.
"Read the third line of the instructions for me, Potter."
"'Add powdered moonstone, stir three times counter-clockwise, allow to simmer for seven
minutes then add two drops of syrup of hellebore.'"
"Did you do everything on the third line, Potter?"
"No," said Harry very quietly.
"I beg your pardon?"
"No," said Harry, more loudly. "I forgot the hellebore."
"I know you did, Potter, which means that this mess is utterly worthless. Evanesco."
"Those of you who have managed to read the instructions, fill one flagon with a sample of your
potion, label it clearly with your name and bring it up to my desk for testing," said Snape.
"Homework: twelve inches of parchment on the properties of moonstone and its uses in potion making, to be handed in on Thursday."
"That was really unfair," said Hermione consolingly, sitting down next to Harry and helping
herself to shepherd's pie. "Your potion wasn't nearly as bad as Goyle's; when he put it in his
flagon the whole thing shattered and set his robes on fire."
"Yeah, well," said Harry, glowering at his plate, "since when has Snape ever been fair to me?"
"I did think he might be a bit better this year," said Hermione in a disappointed voice. "I mean...
you know..." she looked around carefully; there were half a dozen empty seats on either side of
them and nobody was passing the table "... now he's in the Order and everything."
"Poisonous toadstools don't change their spots," said Ron sagely. "Anyway I've always thought
Dumbledore was cracked trusting Snape. Where's the evidence he ever really stopped working for You-Know-Who?"
"I think Dumbledore's probably got plenty of evidence, even if he doesn't share it with you, Ron," snapped Hermione.
"Oh, shut up, the pair of you," said Harry heavily, as Ron opened his mouth to argue back.
Hermione and Ron both froze, looking angry and offended. "Can't you give it a rest?" said Harry. "You're always having a go at each other, it's driving me mad." And abandoning his shepherd's pie, he swung his schoolbag back over his shoulder and left them sitting there.
"Come back, you scurvy dog! Stand fast and fight!" yelled Sir Cadogan in a muffled voice from
"Hermione and me have stopped arguing," he said, sitting down beside Harry.
"Good," grunted Harry.
"But Hermione says she thinks it would be nice if you stopped taking out your temper on us," said Ron.
"I'm not -"
"I'm just passing on the message," said Ron, talking over him. "But I reckon she's right. It's not our fault how Seamus and Snape treat you."
"I never said it -"
"Good-day," said Professor Trelawney in her usual misty, dreamy voice, and Harry broke off,
again feeling both annoyed and slightly ashamed of himself. "And welcome back to Divination. I
"You will find on the tables before you copies of The Dream Oracle, by Inigo Imago. Dream
examination, so..."
"Turn, please, to the introduction and read what Imago has to say on the matter of dream
interpretation. Then, divide into pairs. Use The Dream Oracle to interpret each others most recent dreams. Carry on."
"I never remember my dreams," said Ron, "you say one."
"You must remember one of them," said Harry impatiently.
"Well, I dreamed I was playing Quidditch the other night," said Ron, screwing up his face in an
effort to remember. "What d'you reckon that means?"
"Probably that you're going to be eaten by a giant marshmallow or something," said Harry,
"D'you realize how much homework we've got already? Binns set us a foot-and-a-half-long essay on giant wars, Snape wants a foot on the use of moonstones, and now we've got a month's dream diary from Trelawney! Fred and George weren't wrong about OWL year, were they? That
Umbridge woman had better not give us any..."
"Well, good afternoon!" she said, when finally the whole class had sat down.
A few people mumbled "good afternoon" in reply.
"Tut, tut," said Professor Umbridge. "That won't do, now, will it? I should like you, please, to reply 'Good afternoon, Professor Umbridge'. One more time, please. Good afternoon, class!"
"Good afternoon, Professor Umbridge," they chanted back at her.
"There, now," said Professor Umbridge sweetly. "That wasn't too difficult, was it? Wands away
and quills out, please."
Many of the class exchanged gloomy looks; the order "wands away" had never yet been followed by a lesson they had found interesting. Harry shoved his wand back inside his bag and pulled out quill, ink and parchment. Professor Umbridge opened her handbag, extracted her own wand, which was an unusually short one, and tapped the blackboard sharply with it; words appeared on the board at once:
"Well now, your teaching in this subject has been rather disrupted and fragmented, hasn't it?"
"The constant changing of teachers, many of whom do not seem to have followed any Ministry approved curriculum, has unfortunately resulted in your being far below the standard we would
"You will be pleased to know, however, that these problems are now to be rectified. We will be
this year. Copy down the following, please."
everyone had copied down Professor Umbridge's three course aims she asked, "Has everybody
got a copy of Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard?"
"I think we'll try that again," said Professor Umbridge. "When I ask you a question, I should like
copy of Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard?"
"Yes, Professor Umbridge," rang through the room.
"Good," said Professor Umbridge. "I should like you to turn to page five and read 'Chapter One,
Basics for Beginners'. There will be no need to talk."
"Did you want to ask something about the chapter, dear?" she asked Hermione, as though she had only just noticed her.
"Not about the chapter, no," said Hermione.
"Well, we're reading just now," said Professor Umbridge, showing her small pointed teeth. "If you have other queries we can deal with them at the end of class."
"I've got a query about your course aims," said Hermione.
"And your name is?"
"Hermione Granger," said Hermione.
"Well, Miss Granger, I think the course aims are perfectly clear if you read them through
carefully" said Professor Umbridge in a voice of determined sweetness.
"Well, I don't," said Hermione bluntly. "There's nothing written up there about using defensive
spells."
"Using defensive spells?" Professor Umbridge repeated with a little laugh. "Why, I can't imagine any situation arising in my classroom that would require you to use a defensive spell, Miss Granger. You surely aren't expecting to be attacked during class?"
"We're not going to use magic?" Ron exclaimed loudly.
"Students raise their hands when they wish to speak in my class, Mr. -?"
"Weasley," said Ron, thrusting his hand into the air.
"Yes, Miss Granger? You wanted to ask something else?"
"Yes," said Hermione. "Surely the whole point of Defence Against the Dark Arts is to practice
defensive spells?"
"Are you a Ministry-trained educational expert, Miss Granger?" asked Professor Umbridge, in her falsely sweet voice.
"No, but -"
"Well then, I'm afraid you are not qualified to decide what the 'whole point' of any class is.
be learning about defensive spells in a secure, risk-free way -"
"What use is that?" said Harry loudly. "If we're going to be attacked, it won't be in a -"
"Hand, Mr. Potter!" sang Professor Umbridge.
"And your name is?" Professor Umbridge said to Dean.
"Dean Thomas."
"Well, Mr. Thomas?"
"Well, it's like Harry said, isn't it?" said Dean. "If we're going to be attacked, it won't be risk free."
"I repeat," said Professor Umbridge, smiling in a very irritating fashion at Dean, "do you expect to be attacked during my classes?"
"No, but -"
Professor Umbridge talked over him. "I do not wish to criticize the way things have been run in
this school," she said, an unconvincing smile stretching her wide mouth, "but you have been
mention," she gave a nasty little laugh, "extremely dangerous half-breeds."
"If you mean Professor Lupin," piped up Dean angrily, "he was the best we ever -"
"Hand, Mr. Thomas! As I was saying - you have been introduced to spells that have been
believing that you are likely to meet Dark attacks every other day -"
"No we haven't," Hermione said, "we just -"
"Your hand is not up, Miss Granger!"
"It is my understanding that my predecessor not only performed illegal curses in front of you, he
actually performed them on you."
"Well, he turned out to be a maniac, didn't he?" said Dean hotly. "Mind you, we still learned
loads."
"Your hand is not up, Mr. Thomas!" trilled Professor Umbridge. "Now, it is the view of the
examination, which, after all, is what school is all about. And your name is?" she added, staring
"Parvati Patil, and isn't there a practical bit in our Defense Against the Dark Arts OWL? Aren't
we supposed to show that we can actually do the counter-curses and things?"
"As long as you have studied the theory hard enough, there is no reason why you should not be
able to perform the spells under carefully controlled examination conditions," said Professor
"Without ever practicing them beforehand?" said Parvati incredulously. "Are you telling us that the first time we'll get to do the spells will be during our exam?"
"I repeat, as long as you have studied the theory hard enough -"
"And what good's theory going to be in the real world?" said Harry loudly, his fist in the air again.
"This is school, Mr. Potter, not the real world," she said softly.
"So we're not supposed to be prepared for what's waiting for us out there?"
"There is nothing waiting out there, Mr. Potter."
"Oh, yeah?" said Harry. His temper, which seemed to have been bubbling just beneath the surface all day, was reaching boiling point.
"Who do you imagine wants to attack children like yourselves?" enquired Professor Umbridge in
"Hmm, let's think..." said Harry in a mock thoughtful voice. "Maybe... Lord Voldemort!"
"Ten points from Gryffindor, Mr. Potter."
"Now, let me make a few things quite plain."
"You have been told that a certain Dark wizard has returned from the dead -"
"He wasn't dead," said Harry angrily, "but yeah, he's returned!"
'"Mr-Potter-you-have-already-lost-your-house-ten-points-do-not-make-matters-worse-for yourself," said Professor Umbridge in one breath without looking at him. "As I was saying, you have been informed that a certain Dark wizard is at large once again. This is a lie."
"It is NOT a lie!" said Harry. "I saw him, I fought him!"
"Detention, Mr. Potter!" said Professor Umbridge triumphantly. "Tomorrow evening. Five
Page five, 'Basics for Beginners'."
"Harry, no!" Hermione whispered in a warning voice, tugging at his sleeve, but Harry jerked his
"So, according to you, Cedric Diggory dropped dead of his own accord, did he?" Harry asked, his voice shaking.
"Cedric Diggory's death was a tragic accident," she said coldly.
"It was murder," said Harry. He could feel himself shaking. He had hardly spoken to anyone about this, least of all thirty eagerly listening classmates. "Voldemort killed him and you know it."
scream at him. Then she said, in her softest, most sweetly girlish voice, "Come here, Mr. Potter,
dear."
"Take this to Professor McGonagall, dear," said Professor Umbridge, holding out the note to him.
"Why it's Potty Wee Potter!" cackled Peeves, allowing two of the inkwells to fall to the ground
"Get out of it, Peeves."
"Oooh, Crackpot's feeling cranky" said Peeves, pursuing Harry along the corridor, leering as he
zoomed along above him. "What is it this time, my fine Potty friend? Hearing voices? Seeing
visions? Speaking in -" Peeves blew a gigantic raspberry "-- tongues?"
"I said, leave me ALONE!" Harry shouted, running down the nearest flight of stairs, but Peeves
"Oh, most think he's barking, the potty wee lad, But some are more kindly and think he's just sad, but Peevesy knows better and says that he's mad -- "
"SHUT UP!"
"What on earth are you shouting about, Potter?" she snapped, as Peeves cackled gleefully and
zoomed out of sight. '"Why aren't you in class?"
"I've been sent to see you," said Harry stiffly.
"Sent? What do you mean, sent?"
"Come in here, Potter."
"Well?" said Professor McGonagall, rounding on him. "Is this true?"
"Is what true?" Harry asked, rather more aggressively than he had intended. "Professor?" he added, in an attempt to sound more polite.
"Is it true that you shouted at Professor Umbridge?"
"Yes," said Harry.
"You called her a liar?"
"Yes."
"You told her He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back?"
"Yes."
Professor McGonagall sat down behind her desk, watching Harry closely. Then she said, "Have a biscuit, Potter."
"Have - what?"
"Have a biscuit," she repeated impatiently, indicating a tartan tin of cookies lying on top of one of the piles of papers on her desk. "And sit down."
"Potter, you need to be careful."
"Misbehavior in Dolores Umbridge's class could cost you much more than house points and a
detention."
"What do you -?"
"Potter, use your common sense," snapped Professor McGonagall, with an abrupt return to her
usual manner. "You know where she comes from, you must know to whom she is reporting."
"It says here she's given you detention every evening this week, starting tomorrow," Professor
"Every evening this week!" Harry repeated, horrified. "But, Professor, couldn't you -?"
"No, I couldn't," said Professor McGonagall flatly.
"But -"
"She is your teacher and has every right to give you detention. You will go to her room at five
o'clock tomorrow for the first one. Just remember: tread carefully around Dolores Umbridge."
"But I was telling the truth!" said Harry, outraged. "Voldemort is back, you know he is; Professor Dumbledore knows he is -"
"For heaven's sake, Potter!" said Professor McGonagall, straightening her glasses angrily (she had winced horribly when he had used Voldemort's name). "Do you really think this is about truth or lies? It's about keeping your head down and your temper under control!"
"Have another biscuit," she said irritably, thrusting the tin at him.
"No, thanks," said Harry coldly.
"Don't be ridiculous," she snapped.
"Thanks," he said grudgingly.
"Didn't you listen to Dolores Umbridge's speech at the start-of-term feast, Potter?"
"Yeah," said Harry. "Yeah... she said... progress will be prohibited or... well, it meant that... that the Ministry of Magic is trying to interfere at Hogwarts."
"Well, I'm glad you listen to Hermione Granger at any rate," she said, pointing him out of her
"He says he saw Cedric Diggory murdered..."
"He reckons he dueled with You-Know-Who..."
"Come off it..."
"Who does he think he's kidding?"
"Pur-Lease..."
"What I don't get," said Harry through clenched teeth, laying down his knife and fork (his hands
were shaking too much to hold them steady), "is why they all believed the story two months ago
when Dumbledore told them..."
"The thing is, Harry, I'm not sure they did," said Hermione grimly. "Oh, let's get out of here."
"What d'you mean, you're not sure they believed Dumbledore?" Harry asked Hermione when
"Look, you don't understand what it was like after it happened," said Hermione quietly. "You
back and killed Cedric and fought you."
"Which is the truth!" said Harry loudly.
"I know it is, Harry, so will you please stop biting my head off?" said Hermione wearily. "It's just that before the truth could sink in, everyone went home for the summer, where they spent two months reading about how you're a nutcase and Dumbledore's going senile!"
"Mimbulus mimbletonia," said Hermione, before the Fat Lady could ask. The portrait swung
"How can Dumbledore have let this happen?" Hermione cried suddenly, making Harry and Ron
that bits of stuffing leaked out of the holes. "How can he let that terrible woman teach us? And in
our OWL year, too!"
"Well, we've never had great Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers, have we?" said Harry.
"You know what it's like, Hagrid told us, nobody wants the job; they say it's jinxed."
"Yes, but to employ someone who's actually refusing to let us do magic! What's Dumbledore
playing at?"
"And she's trying to get people to spy for her," said Ron darkly. "Remember when she said she wanted us to come and tell her if we hear anyone saying You-Know-Who's back?"
"Of course she's here to spy on us all, that's obvious, why else would Fudge have wanted her to
come?" snapped Hermione.
"Don't start arguing again," said Harry wearily, as Ron opened his mouth to retaliate. "Can't we
just... let's just do that homework, get it out of the way..."
"Shall we do Snape's stuff first?" said Ron, dipping his quill into his ink. "The properties... of
moonstone... and its uses... in potion-making..." he muttered, writing the words across the top
of his parchment as he spoke them. "There." He underlined the title, then looked up expectantly
"So, what are the properties of moonstone and its uses in potion-making?"
"No, I'm sorry, they've gone too far," she said, standing up and looking positively furious.
"Come on, Ron."
"I - what?" said Ron, plainly playing for time. "No- come on, Hermione - we can't tell them off
for giving out sweets."
"You know perfectly well that those are bits of Nosebleed Nougat or - or Puking Pastilles or -"
"Fainting Fancies?" Harry suggested quietly.
hovered uncertainly for a moment or two, then muttered to Harry, "She's got it under control,"
"That's enough!" Hermione said forcefully to Fred and George, both of whom looked up in mild
"Yeah, you're right," said George, nodding, "this dosage looks strong enough, doesn't it?"
"I told you this morning, you can't test your rubbish on students!"
"We're paying them!" said Fred indignantly.
"I don't care, it could be dangerous!"
"Rubbish," said Fred.
"Calm down, Hermione, they're fine!" said Lee reassuringly as he walked from first-year to first year, inserting purple sweets into their open mouths.
"Yeah, look, they're coming round now," said George.
"Feel all right?" said George kindly to a small dark-haired girl lying at his feet.
"I - I think so," she said shakily.
"Excellent," said Fred happily, but the next second Hermione had snatched both his clipboard and the paper bag of Fainting Fancies from his hands.
"It is NOT excellent!"
"Course it is, they're alive, aren't they?" said Fred angrily.
"You can't do this, what if you made one of them really ill?"
"We're not going to make them ill, we've already tested them all on ourselves, this is just to see
if everyone reacts the same -"
"If you don't stop doing it, I'm going to -"
"Put us in detention?" said Fred, in an I'd-like-to-see-you-try-it voice.
"Make us write lines?" said George, smirking.
"No," she said, her voice quivering with anger, "but I will write to your mother."
"You wouldn't," said George, horrified, taking a step back from her.
"Oh, yes, I would," said Hermione grimly. "I can't stop you eating the stupid things yourselves,
but you're not to give them to the first-years."
"Thank you for your support, Ron," Hermione said acidly.
"You handled it fine by yourself," Ron mumbled.
Hermione stared down at her blank piece of parchment for a few seconds, then said edgily, "Oh,
it's no good, I can't concentrate now. I'm going to bed."
"What in the name of Merlin are you doing?" said Ron, watching her as though fearful for her
"They're hats for house-elves," she said briskly, now stuffing her books back into her bag. "I did
should be able to make lots more."
"You're leaving out hats for the house-elves?" said Ron slowly. "And you're covering them up
with rubbish first?"
"Yes," said Hermione defiantly, swinging her bag on to her back.
"That's not on," said Ron angrily. "You're trying to trick them into picking up the hats. You're
setting them free when they might not want to be free."
"Of course they want to be free!" said Hermione at once, though her face was turning pink.
"Don't you dare touch those hats, Ron!"
"They should at least see what they're picking up," he said firmly. "Anyway..." he rolled up the
parchment on which he had written the title of Snape's essay, "there's no point trying to finish
moonstones, have you?"
"I'm going to bed too."
"But on the plus side, no Snape today" said Ron bracingly.
something, and when Ron asked her what she had to be so happy about, she simply said, "The
hats have gone. Seems the house-elves do want freedom after all."
"I wouldn't bet on it," Ron told her cuttingly. "They might not count as clothes. They didn't look anything like hats to me, more like woolly bladders."
"What you must remember," said little Professor Flitwick squeakily perched as ever on a pile of
books so that he could see over the top of his desk, "is that these examinations may influence
than ever to ensure that you all do yourselves justice!"
"You cannot pass an OWL," said Professor McGonagall grimly, "without serious application,
Transfiguration as long as they put in the work." Neville made a sad little disbelieving noise.
"Yes, you too, Longbottom," said Professor McGonagall. "There's nothing wrong with your work except lack of confidence. So... today we are starting Vanishing Spells. These are easier than Conjuring Spells, which you would not usually attempt until NEWT level, but they are still
among the most difficult magic you will be tested on in your OWL."
"Everyone here?" barked Professor Grubbly-Plank, once all the Slytherins and Gryffindors had
arrived. "Let's crack on then. Who can tell me what these things are called?"
"Oooooh!" said Parvati and Lavender, thoroughly irritating Harry. Anyone would have thought
"Kindly keep your voices down, girls!" said Professor Grubbly-Plank sharply, scattering a
food. "So - anyone know the names of these creatures? Miss Granger?"
"Bowtruckles," said Hermione. "They're tree-guardians, usually live in wand-trees."
"Five points for Gryffindor," said Professor Grubbly-Plank. "Yes, these are Bowtruckles, and as
know what they eat?"
"Woodlice," said Hermione promptly which explained why what Harry had taken to be grains of
brown rice were moving. "But fairy eggs if they can get them."
"Good girl, take another five points. So, whenever you need leaves or wood from a tree in which
the end of the lesson."
"Where's Hagrid?" he asked her, while everyone else was choosing Bowtruckles.
"Never you mind," said Professor Grubbly-Plank repressively, which had been her attitude last
"Maybe," said Malfoy in an undertone, so that only Harry could hear him, "the stupid great oaf's
got himself badly injured."
"Maybe you will if you don't shut up," said Harry out of the side of his mouth.
"Maybe he's been messing with stuff that's too big for him, if you get my drift."
"Dumbledore would know if some thing had happened to Hagrid," said Hermione at once. "It's
draw its face..."
"Yes," came Malfoy's clear drawl from the group nearest them, "Father was talking to the
moron does show up again, he'll probably be sent packing straightaway."
"OUCH!"
"If he calls Hagrid a moron one more time..." said Harry through gritted teeth.
"Harry, don't go picking a row with Malfoy, don't forget, he's a prefect now, he could make life
difficult for you..."
"Wow, I wonder what it'd be like to have a difficult life?" said Harry sarcastically. Ron laughed,
"I just wish Hagrid would hurry up and get back, that's all," said Harry in a low voice, as they
reached the greenhouses. "And don't say that Grubbly-Plank woman's a better teacher!" he added threateningly.
"I wasn't going to," said Hermione calmly.
"Because she'll never be as good as Hagrid," said Harry firmly, fully aware that he had just
"Hi," she said brightly as she passed. A few seconds later, Luna Lovegood emerged, trailing
breath and then said, without so much as a preliminary hello, "I believe He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back and I believe you fought him and escaped from him."
"Er - right," said Harry awkwardly. Luna was wearing what looked like a pair of orange radishes
"You can laugh," Luna said, her voice rising, apparently under the impression that Parvati and
Lavender were laughing at what she had said rather than what she was wearing, "but people used
Snorkack!"
"Well, they were right, weren't they?' said Hermione impatiently. "There weren't any such things as the Blibbering Humdinger or the Crumple-Horned Snorkack."
"D'you mind not offending the only people who believe me?" Harry asked Hermione as they
"Oh, for heaven's sake, Harry, you can do better than her," said Hermione. "Ginny's told me all
wouldn't expect anything else from someone whose father runs The Quibbler."
"I want you to know, Potter," he said in a loud, carrying voice, "that it's not only weirdos who
behind Dumbledore, and so do I."
"Er - thanks very much, Ernie," said Harry, taken aback but pleased. Ernie might be pompous on
entrance of the Great Hall, however, when a loud and angry voice yelled, "Oy, Potter!"
"What now?" he muttered wearily, turning to face Angelina Johnson, who looked as though she
"I'll tell you what now," she said, marching straight up to him and poking him hard in the chest
with her finger. "How come you've landed yourself in detention for five o'clock on Friday?"
"What?" said Harry. "Why... oh yeah, Keeper tryouts!"
"Now he remembers!" snarled Angelina. "Didn't I tell you I wanted to do a tryout with the wholeteam, and find someone who fitted in with everyone! Didn't I tell you I'd booked the Quidditch pitch specially? And now you've decided you're not going to be there!"
"I didn't decide not to be there!" said Harry, stun g by the injustice of these words. "I got
detention from that Umbridge woman, just because I told her the truth about You-Know-Who."
"Well, you can just go straight to her and ask her to let you off on Friday," said Angelina fiercely, "and I don't care how you do it. Tell her You-Know-Who's a figment of your imagination if you like, just make sure you're there!"
"You know what?" Harry said to Ron and Hermione as they entered the Great Hall. "I think we'd better check with Puddlemere United whether Oliver Wood's been killed during a training
session, because Angelina seems to be channeling his spirit."
"What d'you reckon are the odds of Umbridge letting you off on Friday?" said Ron skeptically,
"Less than zero," said Harry glumly, tipping lamb c hops on to his plate and starting to eat. "Better try, though, hadn't I? I'll offer to do two more detentions or something, I dunno..." He
swallowed a mouthful of potato and added, "I hope she doesn't keep me too long this evening.
Trelawney?"
"And it looks like it's going to rain."
"What's that got to do with our homework?" said Hermione, her eyebrows raised.
"Nothing," said Ron at once, his ears reddening.
floor. When he knocked on the door she called, "Come in," in a sugary voice. He entered
"Good evening, Mr. Potter."
"Evening, Professor Umbridge," Harry said stiffly.
"Well, sit down," she said, pointing towards a small table draped in lace beside which she had
"Er," said Harry, without moving. "Professor Umbridge. Er - before we start, I - I wanted to ask
you a... a favor."
"Oh, yes?"
"Well, I'm... I'm in the Gryffindor Quidditch team. And I was supposed to be at the tryouts for
detention that night and do it - do it another night... instead..."
"Oh, no," said Umbridge, smiling so widely that she looked as though she had just swallowed a
particularly juicy fly. "Oh, no, no, no. This is your punishment for spreading evil, nasty,
teach you."
"There," said Umbridge sweetly, "we're getting better at controlling our temper already, aren't
we? Now, you are going to be doing some lines for me, Mr. Potter. No, not with your quill," she
added, as Harry bent down to open his bag. "You're going to be using a rather special one of
mine. Here you are."
"I want you to write, I must not tell lies," she told him softly.
"How many times?" Harry asked, with a creditable imitation of politeness.
"Oh, as long as it takes for the message to sink in," said Umbridge sweetly. "Off you go."
"You haven't given me any ink," he said.
"Oh, you won't need ink," said Professor Umbridge, with the merest suggestion of a laugh in her
"Yes?"
"Nothing," said Harry quietly.
"Come here," she said, after what seemed hours.
"Hand," she said.
"Tut, tut, I don't seem to have made much of an impression yet," she said, smiling. "Well, we'll
just have to try again tomorrow evening, won't we? You may go."
"How come you didn't do it last night?" Harry asked, as Ron stared wildly around the common
muttered something about "doing other stuff", bent low over his parchment and scrawled a few
"That'll have to do," he said, slamming the diary shut. "I've said I dreamed I was buying a new
pair of shoes, she can't make anything weird out of that, can she?"
"How was detention with Umbridge, anyway? What did she make you do?"
Harry hesitated for a fraction of a second, then said, "Lines."
"That's not too bad, then, eh?" said Ron.
"Nope," said Harry.
"Hey - I forgot - did she let you off for Friday?"
"No," said Harry.
"I'm in detention!" Harry yelled after her as she s talked away. "D'you think I'd rather be stuck in a room with that old toad or playing Quidditch?"
"At least it's only lines," said Hermione consolingly, as Harry sank back on to his bench and
looked down at his steak and kidney pie, which he no longer fancied very much. "It's not as if
it's a dreadful punishment, really..."
"I can't believe how much homework we've got," said Ron miserably.
"Well, why didn't you do any last night?" Hermione asked him. "Where were you, anyway?"
"I was... I fancied a walk," said Ron shiftily.
nothing but "good evening" and "goodnight."
"Ah," she said softly, moving around her desk to examine his hand herself. "Good. That ought to
serve as a reminder to you, oughtn't it? You may leave for tonight."
"Do I still have to come back tomorrow?" said Harry picking up his schoolbag with his left hand
"Oh yes," said Professor Umbridge, smiling as widely as before. "Yes, I think we can etch the
message a little deeper with another evening's work."
"Ron?"
"What are you doing?"
"Er - nothing. What are you doing?"
"Come on, you can tell me! What are you hiding here for?"
"I'm - I'm hiding from Fred and George, if you must know," said Ron. "They just went past with a bunch of first-years, I bet they're testing stuff on them again. I mean, they can't do it in the
common room now, can they, not with Hermione there."
"But what have you got your broom for, you haven't been flying, have you?" Harry asked.
"I - well - well, okay, I'll tell you, but don't laugh, all right?" Ron said defensively, turning redder with every second. "I - I thought I'd try out for Gryffindor Keeper now I've got a decent broom. There. Go on. Laugh."
"I'm not laughing," said Harry. Ron blinked. "It's a brilliant idea! It'd be really cool if you got on the team! I've never seen you play Keeper, are you good?"
"I'm not bad," said Ron, who looked immensely relieved at Harry's reaction. "Charlie, Fred and
George always made me Keep for them when they were training during the holidays."
"So you've been practicing tonight?"
"Every evening since Tuesday... just on my own, though. I've been trying to bewitch Quaffles to
fly at me, but it hasn't been easy and I don't know how much use it'll be." Ron looked nervous
and anxious. "Fred and George are going to laugh themselves stupid when I turn up for the
tryouts. They haven't stopped taking the mickey out of me since I got made a prefect."
"I wish I was going to be there," said Harry bitterly, as they set off together towards the common
"Yeah, so do - Harry, what's that on the back of your hand?"
"It's just a cut - it's nothing - it's -"
"I thought you said she was just giving you lines?"
"The old hag!" Ron said in a revolted whisper as they came to a halt in front of the Fat Lady, who was dozing peacefully with her head against her frame. "She's sick! Go to McGonagall, say
something!"
"No," said Harry at once. "I'm not giving her the satisfaction of knowing she's got to me."
"Got to you? You can't let her get away with this!"
"I don't know how much power McGonagall's got over her," said Harry.
"Dumbledore, then, tell Dumbledore!"
"No," said Harry flatly.
"Why not?"
"He's got enough on his mind," said Harry, but that was not the true reason. He was not going to
"Well, I reckon you should -" Ron began, but he was interrupted by the Fat Lady, who had been
watching them sleepily and now burst out, "Are you going to give me the password or will I have to stay awake all night waiting for you to finish your conversation?"
"You know what to do, Mr. Potter," said Umbridge, smiling sweetly at him.
"Let's see if you've gotten the message yet, shall we?" said Umbridges soft voice half an hour later. She moved towards him, stretching out her short ringed fingers for his arm. And then, as she took hold of him to examine the words now cut into his skin, pain seared, not across the back of his hand, but across the scar on his forehead. At the same time, he had a most peculiar sensation somewhere around his midriff.
"Yes, it hurts, doesn't it?" she said softly.
"Well, I think I've made my point, Mr. Potter. You may go."
"Mimbulus mimbletonia!" he gasped at the Fat Lady, who swung forwards once more.
"Harry, I did it, I'm in, I'm Keeper!"
"What? Oh - brilliant!" said Harry, trying to smile naturally, while his heart continued to race and his hand throbbed and bled.
"Have a Butterbeer." Ron pressed a bottle on him. "I can't believe it - where's Hermione gone?"
"She's there," said Fred, who was also swigging Butterbeer, and pointed to an armchair by the
"Well, she said she was pleased when I told her," said Ron, looking slightly put out.
"Let her sleep," said George hastily. It was a few moments before Harry noticed that several of
"Come here, Ron, and see if Oliver's old robes fit you," called Katie Bell, "we can take off his
name and put yours on instead..."
"Sorry I was a bit short with you earlier, Potter," she said abruptly. "It's stressful this managing
lark, you know, I'm starting to think I was a bit hard on Wood sometimes." She was watching
"Look, I know he's your best mate, but he's not fabulous," she said bluntly. "I think with a bit of
time. And do me a favor and help Ron as much as you can, okay?"
"Oh, Harry, it's you... good about Ron, isn't it?" she said blearily. "I'm just so-so - so tired," she
yawned. "I was up until one o'clock making more hat s. They're disappearing like mad!"
"Great," said Harry distractedly; if he did not tell somebody soon, he would burst. "Listen,
Hermione, I was just up in Umbridge's office and she touched my arm."
Hermione listened closely. When Harry had finished, she said slowly "You're worried You-
Know-Who's controlling her like he controlled Quirrell?"
"Well," said Harry, dropping his voice, "it's a possibility, isn't it?"
"I suppose so," said Hermione, though she sounded unconvinced. "But I don't think he can
Imperius Curse, I suppose..."
Then Hermione said, "But last year your scar hurt when nobody was touching you, and didn't
while you were with her?"
"She's evil," said Harry flatly. "Twisted."
"She's horrible, yes, but... Harry, I think you ought to tell Dumbledore your scar hurt."
"I'm not bothering him with this. Like you just said, its not a big deal. It's been hurting on and
off all summer - it was just a bit worse tonight, that's all -"
"Harry, I'm sure Dumbledore would want to be bothered by this -"
"Yeah," said Harry, before he could stop himself, "that's the only bit of me Dumbledore cares
about, isn't it, my scar?"
"Don't say that, it's not true!"
"I think I'll write and tell Sirius about it, see what he thinks -"
"Harry, you can't put something like that in a letter!" said Hermione, looking alarmed. "Don't
aren't being intercepted any more!"
"All right, all right, I won't tell him, then!" said Harry irritably. He got to his feet. "I'm going to
bed. Tell Ron for me, will you?"
"Oh no," said Hermione, looking relieved, "if you're going that means I can go too, without being rude. I'm absolutely exhausted and I want to make some more hats tomorrow. Listen, you can help me if you like, it's quite fun, I'm getting better, I can do patterns and bobbles and all sorts of things now."
"Er... no, I don't think I will, thanks," he said. "Er- not tomorrow. I've got loads of homework to
do..."
"I would not go that way if I were you," said Nearly Headless Nick, drifting disconcertingly
through a wall just ahead of Harry as he walked down the passage. "Peeves is planning an
amusing joke on the next person to pass the bust of Paracelsus halfway down the corridor."
"Does it involve Paracelsus falling on top of the persons head?" asked Harry.
"Funnily enough, it does," said Nearly Headless Nick in a bored voice. "Subtlety has never been
to it... see you, Harry"
"Yeah, bye," said Harry and instead of turning right, he turned left, taking a longer but safer route up to the Owlery. His spirits rose as he walked past window after window showing brilliantly blue sky; he had training later, he would be back on the Quidditch pitch at last.
"I'm not doing anything wrong," Harry called after her. She had the unmistakable air of a cat
"There you are," he said, spotting her somewhere near the very top of the vaulted ceiling. "Get
down here, I've got a letter for you."
"Right, I know this says Snuffles on the outside," he told her, giving her the letter to clasp in her
beak and, without knowing exactly why, whispering, "but it's for Sirius, okay?"
"Safe flight, then," said Harry and he carried her to one of the windows; with a moment's
"Hi," said Harry automatically.
"Oh... hi," she said breathlessly. "I didn't think anyone would be up here this early... I only
remembered five minutes ago, it's my mum's birthday."
"Right," said Harry. His brain seemed to have jammed. He wanted to say something funny and
"Nice day," he said, gesturing to the windows. His insides seemed to shrivel with embarrassment.
"Yeah," said Cho, looking around for a suitable owl. "Good Quidditch conditions. I haven't been
out all week, have you?"
"No," said Harry.
"Hey, has Gryffindor got a new Keeper yet?" she asked.
"Yeah," said Harry. "It's my friend Ron Weasley, d'you know him?"
"The Tornados-hater?" said Cho rather coolly. "Is he any good?"
"Yeah," said Harry, "I think so. I didn't see his tryout, though, I was in detention."
"That Umbridge woman's foul," she said in a low voice. "Putting you in detention just because
school. You were really brave standing up to her like that."
"Aha!' said Filch, taking a flat-footed step toward s Harry, his pouchy cheeks trembling with
anger. "I've had a tip-off that you are intending to place a massive order for Dungbombs!"
"Who told you I was ordering Dungbombs?"
"I have my sources," said Filch in a self-satisfied hiss. "Now hand over whatever it is you're
sending."
Feeling immensely thankful that he had not dawdled in posting off the letter, Harry said, "I can't,
it's gone."
"Gone?" said Filch, his face contorting with rage.
"Gone," said Harry calmly.
"How do I know you haven't got it in your pocket?"
"Because -"
"I saw him send it," said Cho angrily.
"You saw him -?"
"That's right, I saw him," she said fiercely.
"If I get so much as a whiff of a Dungbomb."
"Thanks," Harry said.
"No problem," said Cho, finally fixing the parcel to the barn owl's other leg, her face slightly
pink. "You weren't ordering Dungbombs, were you?"
"No," said Harry.
"I wonder why he thought you were, then?" she said as she carried the owl to the window.
castle, Cho said, "I'm going this way. Well, I'll... I'll see you around, Harry."
"Yeah... see you."
"Morning," Harry said brightly to Ron and Hermione as he joined them at the Gryffindor table in
"What are you looking so pleased about?" said Ron, eyeing Harry in surprise.
"Erm... Quidditch later," said Harry happily, pulling a large platter of bacon and eggs towards
"Oh... yeah..." said Ron. He put down the piece of toast he was eating and took a large swig of
pumpkin juice. Then he said, "Listen... you don't fancy going out a bit earlier with me, do you?
Just to - er - give me some practice before training? So I can, you know, get my eye in a bit."
"Yeah, okay," said Harry.
"Look, I don't think you should," said Hermione seriously. "You're both really behind on
homework as it -"
"Anything interesting?" said Ron. Harry grinned, knowing Ron was keen to keep her off the
"No," she sighed, "just some guff about the bass player in the Weird Sisters getting married."
"Wait a moment," said Hermione suddenly. "Oh no... Sirius!"
"What's happened?" said Harry, snatching at the paper so violently it ripped down the middle,
"'The Ministry of Magic has received a tip-off from a reliable source that Sirius Black, notorious
mass murderer... blah blah blah... is currently hiding in London!'" Hermione read from her half
"Lucius Malfoy I'll bet anything," said Harry in a low, furious voice. "He did recognize Sirius on the platform..."
"What?" said Ron, looking alarmed. "You didn't say -"
"Shh!" said the other two.
"... 'warns wizarding community that Black is very dangerous... killed thirteen people... broke
out of Azkaban... ' the usual rubbish," Hermione concluded, laying down her half of the paper
and looking fearfully at Harry and Ron. "Well, he just won't be able to leave the house again,
that's all," she whispered. "Dumbledore did warn him not to."
"Hey!" he said, flattening it down so Hermione and Ron could see it. "Look at this!"
"I've got all the robes I want," said Ron.
"No," said Harry. "Look... this little piece here..."
"Sturgis Podmore?" said Ron slowly. "He's that bloke who looks like his head's been thatched,
isn't he? He's one of the Ord--"
"Ron, shh!" said Hermione, casting a terrified look around them.
"Six months in Azkaban!" whispered Harry, shocked. "Just for trying to get through a door!"
"Don't be silly, it wasn't just for trying to get through a door. What on earth was he doing at the
Ministry of Magic at one o'clock in the morning?" breathed Hermione.
"D'you reckon he was doing something for the Order?" Ron muttered.
"Wait a moment..." said Harry slowly. "Sturgis was supposed to come and see us off,
remember?"
"Yeah, he was supposed to be part of our guard going to King's Cross, remember? And Moody
he?"
"Well, maybe they didn't expect him to get caught," said Hermione.
"It could be a frame-up!" Ron exclaimed excitedly. "No - listen!" he went on, dropping his voice
dramatically at the threatening look on Hermione's face. "The Ministry suspects he's one of
through a door at all! Maybe they've just made something up to get him!"
"Do you know, I wouldn't be at all surprised if that were true."
"Right, well, I think we should tackle that essay for Sprout on self-fertilizing shrubs first and if
we're lucky we'll be able to start McGonagall's Inanimatus Conjurus Spell before lunch..."
"I mean, we can do it tonight," said Ron, as he and Harry walked down the sloping lawns towards the Quidditch pitch, their broomsticks over their shoulders, and with Hermione's dire warnings that they would fail all their OWLs still ringing in their ears. "And we've got tomorrow. She gets too worked up about work, that's her trouble..." There was a pause and he added, in a slightly more anxious tone, "D'you think she meant it when she said we weren't copying from her?"
"Yeah, I do," said Harry. "Still, this is important, too, we've got to practice if we want to stay on
the Quidditch team..."
"Yeah, that's right," said Ron, in a heartened tone. "And we have got plenty of time to do it all..."
"All right, Ron?" said George, winking at him.
"Yeah," said Ron, who had become quieter and quieter all the way down to the pitch.
"Ready to show us all up, Ickle Prefect?" said Fred, emerging tousle-haired from the neck of his
"Shut up," said Ron, stony-faced, pulling on his own team robes for the first time. They fitted
"Okay, everyone," said Angelina, entering from the Captain's office, already changed. "Let's get to it; Alicia and Fred, if you can just bring out the ball crate for us. Oh, and there are a couple of
people out there watching but I want you to just ignore them, all right?"
"What's that Weasley's riding?'" Malfoy called in his sneering drawl. "Why would anyone put a
flying charm on a mouldy old log like that?"
"Ignore them," he said, accelerating to catch up with Ron, "we'll see who's laughing after we
play them..."
"Exactly the attitude I want, Harry," said Angelina approvingly, soaring around them with the
Quaffle under her arm and slowing to hover on the spot in front of her airborne team. "Okay,
everyone, we're going to start with some passes just to warm up, the whole team please -"
"Hey, Johnson, what's with that hairstyle, anyway?" shrieked Pansy Parkinson from below. "Why would anyone want to look like they've got worms coming out of their head?"
Angelina swept her long braided hair out of her face and continued calmly, "Spread out, then,
and let's see what we can do..."
"Pass it on, Ron," called Angelina, as though nothing had happened.
"Hey, Potter, how's your scar feeling?" called Malfoy. "Sure you don't need a lie down? It must
be, what, a whole week since you were in the hospital wing, that's a record for you, isn't it?"
"Come on now, Ron," said Angelina crossly, as he dived for the ground again, chasing the
Quaffle. "Pay attention."
"Sorry!" Ron groaned, zooming forwards to see whether he had done any damage.
"Get back in position, she's fine!" barked Angelina. "But as you're passing to a teammate, do try
not to knock her off her broom, won't you? We've got Bludgers for that!"
"Here, take this," Fred told her, handing her something small and purple from out of his pocket,
"it'll clear it up in no time."
"All right," called Angelina, "Fred, George, go and get your bats and a Bludger. Ron, get up to
obviously."
"Ron's making a right pig's ear of things, isn't he?" muttered George, as the three of them landed at the crate containing the balls and opened it to extract one of the Bludgers and the Snitch.
"He's just nervous," said Harry, "he was fine when I was practicing with him this morning."
"Yeah, well, I hope he hasn't peaked too soon," said Fred gloomily.
"Stop - stop - STOP!" screamed Angelina. "Ron - you're not covering your middle post!"
"Oh... sorry..."
"You keep shifting around while you're watching the Chasers!" said Angelina. "Either stay in
vaguely off to one side, that's how you let in the last three goals!"
"Sorry..." Ron repeated, his red face shining like a beacon against the bright blue sky.
"And Katie, can't you do something about that nosebleed?"
"It's just getting worse!" said Katie thickly, attempting to stem the flow with her sleeve.
"Well, let's try again," said Angelina. She was ignoring the Slytherins, who had now set up a
chant of "Gryffindor are losers, Gryffindor are losers," but there was a certain rigidity about her
"What now?" he said impatiently to Alicia, who was nearest.
"Katie," she said shortly.
"She needs the hospital wing," said Angelina.
"We'll take her," said Fred. "She - er - might have swallowed a Blood Blisterpod by mistake -"
"Well, there's no point continuing with no Beaters and a Chaser gone," said Angelina glumly as
Fred and George zoomed off towards the castle supporting Katie between them. "Come on, let's
go and get changed."
"How was practice?" asked Hermione rather coolly half an hour later, as Harry and Ron climbed
"It was -" Harry began.
"Completely lousy," said Ron in a hollow voice, sinking into a chair beside Hermione. She
"Well, it was only your first one," she said consolingly, "it's bound to take time to -"
"Who said it was me who made it lousy?" snapped Ron.
"No one," said Hermione, looking taken aback, "I thought -"
"You thought I was bound to be rubbish?"
"No, of course I didn't! Look, you said it was lousy so I just -"
"I'm going to get started on some homework," said Ron angrily and stomped off to the staircase
"Was he lousy?"
"No," said Harry loyally.
"Well, I suppose he could've played better," Harry muttered, "but it was only the first training
session, like you said..."
himself was having difficulty in getting the "Gryffindor are losers" chant out of his head.
"You know, we probably should try and get more homework done during the week," Harry
"Yeah," said Ron, rubbing slightly bloodshot eyes and throwing his fifth spoiled bit of parchment into the fire beside them. "Listen... shall we just ask Hermione if we can have a look at what she's done?"
"No," he said heavily, "you know she won't let us."
"Nearly done?"
"No," said Ron shortly.
"Jupiter's biggest moon is Ganymede, not Callisto," she said, pointing over Ron's shoulder at a
line in his Astronomy essay, "and it's lo that's got the volcanoes."
"Thanks," snarled Ron, scratching out the offending sentences.
"Sorry, I only -"
"Yeah, well, if you've just come over here to criticize -"
"Ron -"
"I haven't got time to listen to a sermon, all right, Hermione, I'm up to my neck in it here -"
"No - look!"
"Isn't that Hermes?" said Hermione, sounding amazed.
"Blimey, it is!" said Ron quietly, throwing down his quill and getting to his feet. "What's Percy
writing to me for?"
"That's definitely Percy's handwriting," said Ron, s inking back into his chair and staring at the
at the other two. "What d'you reckon?"
"Open it!" said Hermione eagerly, and Harry nodded.
"Well," he said, trying to sound as though he found the whole thing a joke, "if you want to - er -
what is it?" - he checked Percy's letter - "Oh yeah - 'severe ties' with me, I swear I won't get violent."
"Give it back," said Ron, holding out his hand. "He is -" Ron said jerkily, tearing Percy's letter in half "the world's -" he tore it into quarters "biggest -" he tore it into eighths "git." He threw the pieces into the fire.
"Come on, we've got to get this finished sometime before dawn," he said briskly to Harry,
"Oh, give them here," she said abruptly.
"What?" said Ron.
"Give them to me, I'll look through them and correct them," she said.
"Are you serious? Ah, Hermione, you're a life-saver," said Ron, "what can I -?"
"What you can say is, promise we'll never leave our homework this late again," she said,
"Thanks a million, Hermione," said Harry weakly, passing over his essay and sinking back into
"Okay, write that down," Hermione said to Ron, pushing his essay and a sheet covered in her own writing back to Ron, "then add this conclusion I've written for you."
"Hermione, you are honestly the most wonderful person I've ever met," said Ron weakly, "and if
I'm ever rude to you again -"
"- I'll know you're back to normal," said Hermione. "Harry, yours is okay except for this bit at the end, I think you must have misheard Professor Sinistra, Europa's covered in ice, not mice -
Harry?"
"Er - Harry?" said Ron uncertainly. "Why are you down there?"
"Because I've just seen Sirius's head in the fire," said Harry.
"Sirius's head?" Hermione repeated. "You mean like when he wanted to talk to you during the
Triwizard Tournament? But he wouldn't do that now, it would be too - Sirius!"
"I was starting to think you'd go to bed before everyone else had disappeared," he said. "I've
been checking every hour."
"You've been popping into the fire every hour?" Harry said, half-laughing.
"Just for a few seconds to check if the coast was clear."
"But what if you'd been seen?" said Hermione anxiously.
"Well, I think a girl - first-year, by the look of her - might've got a glimpse of me earlier, but
don't worry" Sirius said hastily, as Hermione clapped a hand to her mouth, "I was gone the
something."
"But, Sirius, this is taking an awful risk -" Hermione began.
"You sound like Molly," said Sirius. "This was the only way I could come up with of answering
Harrys letter without resorting to a code - and codes are breakable."
"You didn't say you'd written to Sirius!" said Hermione accusingly.
"I forgot," said Harry, which was perfectly true; h is meeting with Cho in the Owlery had driven
everything before it out of his mind. "Don't look at me like that, Hermione, there was no way
anyone would have got secret information out of it, was there, Sirius?"
"No, it was very good," said Sirius, smiling. "Anyway, we'd better be quick, just in case we're
disturbed - your scar."
"What about -?" Ron began, but Hermione interrupted him. "We'll tell you afterwards. Go on,
Sirius."
"Well, I know it can't be fun when it hurts, but we don't think it's anything to really worry about. It kept aching all last year, didn't it?"
"Yeah, and Dumbledore said it happened whenever Voldemort was feeling a powerful emotion,"
said Harry, ignoring, as usual, Ron and Hermione's winces. "So maybe he was just, I dunno,
really angry or something the night I had that detention."
"Well, now he's back it's bound to hurt more often," said Sirius.
"So you don't think it had anything to do with Umbridge touching me when I was in detention
with her?" Harry asked.
"I doubt it," said Sirius. "I know her by reputation and I'm sure she's no Death Eater -"
"She's foul enough to be one," said Harry darkly, and Ron and Hermione nodded vigorously in
"Yes, but the world isn't split into good people and Death Eaters," said Sirius with a wry smile. "I know she's a nasty piece of work, though -- you should hear Remus talk about her."
"Does Lupin know her?" asked Harry quickly, remembering Umbridge's comments about
"No," said Sirius, "but she drafted a bit of anti-werewolf legislation two years ago that makes it
almost impossible for him to get a job."
"What's she got against werewolves?" said Hermione angrily.
"Scared of them, I expect," said Sirius, smiling at her indignation. "Apparently she loathes part humans; she campaigned to have merpeople rounded up and tagged last year, too. Imagine
on the loose."
"Sirius!" she said reproachfully. "Honestly, if you made a bit of an effort with Kreacher, I'm sure he'd respond. After all, you are the only member of his family he's got left, and Professor
Dumbledore said -"
"So, what are Umbridge's lessons like?" Sirius interrupted. "Is she training you all to kill half-breeds?"
"No," said Harry, ignoring Hermione's affronted look at being cut off in her defense of Kreacher. "She's not letting us use magic at all!"
"All we do is read the stupid textbook," said Ron.
"Ah, well, that figures," said Sirius. "Our information from inside the Ministry is that Fudge
doesn't want you trained in combat."
"Trained in combat!" repeated Harry incredulously. "What does he think we're doing here,
forming some sort of wizard army?"
"That's exactly what he thinks you're doing," said Sirius, "or, rather, that's exactly what he's
the Ministry of Magic."
There was a pause at this, then Ron said, "That's the most stupid thing I've ever heard, including
all the stuff that Luna Lovegood comes out with."
"So we're being prevented from learning Defense Against the Dark Arts because Fudge is scared
we'll use spells against the Ministry?" said Hermione, looking furious.
"Yep," said Sirius. "Fudge thinks Dumbledore will stop at nothing to seize power. He's getting
arrested on some trumped-up charge."
"D'you know if there's going to be anything about Dumbledore in the Daily Prophet tomorrow?
Ron's brother Percy reckons there will be -"
"I don't know," said Sirius, "I haven't seen anyone from the Order all weekend, they're all busy.
It's just been Kreacher and me here."
"So you haven't had any news about Hagrid, either?"
"Ah..." said Sirius, "well, he was supposed to be back by now, no one's sure what's happened to
him." Then, seeing their stricken faces, he added quickly, "But Dumbledore's not worried, so
don't you three get yourselves in a state; I'm sure Hagrid's fine."
"But if he was supposed to be back by now..." said Hermione in a small, anxious voice.
"Madame Maxime was with him, we've been in touch with her and she says they got separated
not perfectly okay."
"Listen, don't go asking too many questions about Hagrid," said Sirius hastily, "it'll just draw
Hagrid's tough, he'll be okay." And when they did not appear cheered by this, Sirius added,
"When's your next Hogsmeade weekend, anyway? I was thinking, we got away with the dog
disguise at the station, didn't we? I thought I could --"
"NO!" said Harry and Hermione together, very loudly.
"Sirius, didn't you see the Daily Prophet?" said Hermione anxiously.
"Oh, that," said Sirius, grinning, "they're always guessing where I am, they haven't really got a
clue -"
"Yeah, but we think this time they have,' said Harry. "Something Malfoy said on the train made
Malfoy - so don't come up here, whatever you do. If Malfoy recognizes you again -"
"All right, all right, I've got the point," said Sirius. He looked most displeased. "Just an idea,
thought you might like to get together."
"I would, I just don't want you chucked back in Azkaban!" said Harry.
"You're less like your father than I thought," he said finally, a definite coolness in his voice. "The risk would've been what made it fun for James."
"Look -"
"Well, I'd better get going, I can hear Kreacher coming down the stairs," said Sirius, but Harry
was sure he was lying. "I'll write to tell you a time I can make it back into the fire, then, shall I? If you can stand to risk it?"
"Umbridge - Inquisitor?" said Harry darkly, his half-eaten piece of toast slipping from his fingers. "What does that maen?" Hermione rad aloud:
"In a surprise move last night the Ministry of Magic passed new legislation giving itself an
"'The Minister has been growing uneasy about goings-on at Hogwarts for some time,' said junior Assistant to the Minister, Percy Weasley. 'He is now responding to concerns voiced by anxious parents, who feel the school may be moving in a direction they do not approve.'
"This is not the first time in recent weeks that the Minister, Cornelius Fudge, has used new laws
person. 'That's how Dolores Umbridge came to be appointed to the teaching staff at Hogwarts,' said Weasley last night. 'Dumboldore couldn't find anyone so the Minister put in Umbridge, and of course, she's been an immediate success --'"
"She's been a WHAT?" said Harry loudly.
"Wait, there's more," said Hermione grimly.
"'--an immediate success, totally revolutionizing the teaching of Defense Against the Dark Arts
"It is this last function that the Ministry has now formalized with the passing of Educational
"'This is an exciting new phase in the Minister's plan to get to grips with what some are calling the falling standards at Hogwarts,' said Weasley. 'The Inquisitor will have powers to inspect her
"The Ministry's new moves have received enthusiastic support from parents of students at
"Among those eccentric decisions are undoubtedly the controversial staff appointments previously described in this newspaper, which have included the employment of werewolf Remus Lupin, half-giant Rubeus Hagrid and delusional ex-Auror, 'Mad - Eye' Moody.
"Rumors abound, of course, that Albus Dumbledore, once Supreme Mugwump of the
"'I think the appointment of the Inquisitor is a first step towards ensuring that Hogwarts has a
"Wizengamot elders Griselda Marchbanks and Tiberius Ogden have resigned in protest at the
"'Hogwarts is a school, not an outpost of Cornelius Fudge's office,' said Madam Marchbanks. 'This is a further disgusting attempt to discredit Albus Dumbledore.'
"(For a full account of Madam Marchbanks's alleged links to subversive goblin groups, turn to
page seventeen.)"
"So now we know how we ended up with Umbridge! Fudge passed this Decree and forced her
on us! And now he's given her the power to inspect the other teachers!" Hermione was breathing
fast and her eyes were very bright. "I can't believe this. It's outrageous!"
"I know it is," said Harry. He looked down at his right hand, clenched on the table-top, and saw
"What?" said Harry and Hermione together, staring at him.
"Oh, I can't wait to see McGonagall inspected," said Ron happily. "Umbridge won't know what's hit her."
"Well, come on," said Hermione, jumping up, "we'd better get going, if she's inspecting Binns's
class we don't want to be late..."
"I have awarded you the grades you would have received if you presented this work in your
OWL," said Snape with a smirk, as he swept among them, passing back their homework. "This
should give you a realiztic idea of what to expect in the examination."
"The general standard of this homework was abysmal. Most of you would have failed had this
dunces who get a D."
He smirked as Malfoy sniggered and said in a carrying whisper, "Some people got a D? Ha!"
"Well, that wasn't as bad as last week, was it?" said Hermione, as they climbed the steps out of
the dungeon and made their way across the Entrance Hall towards lunch. "And the homework
didn't go too badly, either, did it?"
When neither Ron nor Harry answered, she pressed on, "I mean, all right, I didn't expect the top
wouldn't you say?"
"Of course, a lot can happen between now and the exam, we've got plenty of time to improve,
on..."
"Obviously, I'd have been thrilled if I'd got an O -"
"Hermione," said Ron sharply "if you want to know what grades we got, ask."
"I don't - I didn't mean - well, if you want to tell me -"
"I got a P," said Ron, ladling soup into his bowl. "Happy?"
"Well, that's nothing to be ashamed of," said Fred, who had just arrived at the table with George
and Lee Jordan and was sitting down on Harry's right. "Nothing wrong with a good healthy P."
"But," said Hermione, "doesn't P stand for..."
"Poor, yeah," said Lee Jordan. "Still, better than D, isn't it? 'Dreadful'?"
"So top grade's O for 'Outstanding'," she was saying, 'and then there's A-"
"No, E," George corrected her, "E for 'Exceeds Expectations'. And I've always thought Fred and I should've got E in everything, because we exceeded expectations just by turning up for the exams."
They all laughed except Hermione, who ploughed on, "So, after E it's A for 'Acceptable', and that's the last pass grade, isn't it?"
"Yep," said Fred, dunking an entire roll in his soup, transferring it to his mouth and swallowing it whole.
"Then you get P for 'Poor'-" Ron raised both his arms in mock celebration - "and D for 'Dreadful'."
"And then T," George reminded him.
"T?" asked Hermione, looking appalled. "Even lower than a D? What on earth does that stand for?"
"Troll", said George promptly.
"You lot had an inspected lesson yet?" Fred asked them.
"No," said Hermione at once. "Have you?"
"Just now, before lunch," said George. "Charms."
"What was it like?" Harry and Hermione asked together.
"Not that bad. Umbridge just lurked in the corner making notes on a clipboard. You know what
were really good, that was it."
"I can't see old Flitwick getting marked down," said George, "he usually gets everyone through
their exams all right."
"Who've you got this afternoon?" Fred asked Harry.
"Trelawney -"
"A T if ever I saw one."
"- and Umbridge herself."
"Well, be a good boy and keep your temper with Umbridge today" said George. "Angelina'll do
her nut if you miss any more Quidditch practices."
"Good afternoon, Professor Trelawney," said Professor Umbridge with her wide smile. "You
received my note, I trust? Giving the time and date of your inspection?"
"We shall be continuing our study of prophetic dreams today," she said in a brave attempt at her
usual mystic tones, though her voice shook slightly. "Divide into pairs, please, and interpret each
other's latest night-time visions with the aid of the Oracle."
"Think of a dream, quick," he told Ron, "in case the old toad comes our way."
"I did it last time," Ron protested, "it's your turn, you tell me one."
"Oh, I dunno..." said Harry desperately, who could not remember dreaming anything at all over
the last few days. "Lets say I dreamed I was... drowning Snape in my cauldron. Yeah, that'll
do..."
"Okay, we've got to add your age to the date you had the dream, the number of letters in the
subject... would that be 'drowning' or 'cauldron' or 'Snape'?"
"It doesn't matter, pick any of them," said Harry, chancing a glance behind him. Professor
"What night did you dream this again?" Ron said, immersed in calculations.
"I dunno, last night, whenever you like," Harry told him, trying to listen to what Umbridge was
"Now," said Umbridge, looking up at Trelawney, "you've been in this post how long, exactly?"
ignore it, she said in a deeply resentful tone, "Nearly sixteen years."
"Quite a period," said Professor Umbridge, making a note on her clipboard. "So it was Professor
Dumbledore who appointed you?"
"That's right," said Professor Trelawney shortly.
"And you are a great-great-granddaughter of the celebrated Seer Cassandra Trelawney?"
"Yes," said Professor Trelawney, holding her head a little higher.
"But I think - correct me if I am mistaken - that you are the first in your family since Cassandra
to be possessed of Second Sight?"
"These things often skip - er - three generations," said Professor Trelawney.
"Of course," she said sweetly, making yet another note. "Well, if you could just predict
something for me, then?" And she looked up enquiringly, still smiling.
Professor Trelawney stiffened as though unable to believe her ears. "I don't understand you," she
"I'd like you to make a prediction for me," said Professor Umbridge very clearly.
"The Inner Eye does not See upon command!" she said in scandalized tones.
"I see," said Professor Umbridge softly, making yet another note on her clipboard.
"I - but - but... wait!" said Professor Trelawney suddenly, in an attempt at her usual ethereal
"I... I think I do see something... something that concerns you... why, I sense something...
something dark... some grave peril..."
"I am afraid... I am afraid that you are in grave danger!" Professor Trelawney finished
"Right," she said softly, scribbling on her clipboard once more. "Well, if that's really the best you can do..."
"Well?" she said, snapping her long fingers under Harry's nose, uncharacteristically brisk. "Let
me see the start you've made on your dream diary, please."
"Wands away" she instructed them all with a smile, and those people who had been hopeful
enough to take them out, sadly returned them to their bags. "As we finished Chapter One last
Common Defensive Theories and their Derivation'. There will be no need to talk."
bent down and whispered, so that the rest of the class could not hear, "What is it this time, Miss
Granger?"
"I've already read Chapter Two," said Hermione.
"Well then, proceed to Chapter Three."
"I've read that too. I've read the whole book."
"Well, then, you should be able to tell me what Slinkhard says about counter-jinxes in Chapter
Fifteen."
"He says that counter-jinxes are improperly named," said Hermione promptly. "He says - 'jinx' is just a name people give their jinxes when they want to make them sound more acceptable."
"But I disagree," Hermione continued.
"You disagree?" she repeated.
"Yes, I do," said Hermione, who, unlike Umbridge, was not whispering, but speaking in a clear,
carrying voice that had by now attracted the attention of the rest of the class. "Mr. Slinkhard
doesn't like jinxes, does he? But, I think they can be very useful when they're used defensively."
"Oh, you do, do you?" said Professor Umbridge, forgetting to whisper and straightening up. "Well, I'm afraid it is Mr. Slinkhard's opinion, and not yours, that matters within this classroom,
Miss Granger."
"But -" Hermione began.
"That is enough," said Professor Umbridge. She walked back to the front of the class and stood
before them, all the jauntiness she had shown at the beginning of the lesson gone. "Miss Granger, I am going to take five points from Gryffindor house."
"What for?" said Harry angrily.
"Don't you get involved!" Hermione whispered urgently to him.
"For disrupting my class with pointless interruptions," said Professor Umbridge smoothly. "I am
exception of Professor Quirrell, who did at least appear to have restricted himself to age appropriate subjects - would have passed a Ministry inspection -"
"Yeah, Quirrell was a great teacher," said Harry loudly, "there was just that minor drawback of
him having Lord Voldemort sticking out of the back of his head."
"I think another week's detentions would do you some good, Mr. Potter," said Umbridge sleekly.
"Miss Johnson, how dare you make such a racket in the Great Hall! Five points from Gryffindor!"
"But Professor - he's gone and landed himself in detention again -"
"What's this, Potter?" said Professor McGonagall sharply, rounding on Harry. "Detention? From
whom?"
"From Professor Umbridge," muttered Harry, not meeting Professor McGonagalls beady, square-framed eyes.
"Are you telling me," she said, lowering her voice so that the group of curious Ravenclaws
behind them could not hear, "that after the warning I gave you last Monday you lost your temper
in Professor Umbridge's class again?"
"Yes," Harry muttered, speaking to the floor.
"Potter, you must get a grip on yourself! You are heading for serious trouble! Another five points
from Gryffindor!"
"But - what -? Professor, no!" Harry said, furious at this injustice, "I'm already being punished
by her, why do you have to take points as well?"
"Because detentions do not appear to have any effect on you whatsoever!" said Professor
McGonagall tartly. "No, not another word of complaint, Potter! And as for you, Miss Johnson,
captaincy!"
"She's taken points off Gryffindor because I'm having my hand sliced open every night! How is
that fair, how?"
"I know, mate," said Ron sympathetically, tipping bacon on to Harry's plate, "she's bang out of
order."
"You think McGonagall was right, do you?" said Harry angrily to the picture of Cornelius Fudge
"I wish she hadn't taken points from you, but I think she's right to warn you not to lose your
temper with Umbridge," said Hermione's voice, while Fudge gesticulated forcefully from the
"Excellent," whispered Ron, as they sat down in their usual seats. "Let's see Umbridge get what
she deserves."
"That will do," she said and silence fell immediately. "Mr. Finnigan, kindly come here and hand back the homework - Miss Brown, please take this box of mice - don't be silly, girl, they won't hurt you - and hand one to each student -"
"Hem, hem," said Professor Umbridge, employing the same silly little cough she had used to
"Right then, everyone, listen closely - Dean Thomas, if you do that to the mouse again I shall put
were left with a certain amount of shell have got the gist of the spell. Today, we shall be -"
"Hem, hem," said Professor Umbridge.
"Yes?" said Professor McGonagall, turning round, her eyebrows so close together they seemed to form one long, severe line.
"I was just wondering, Professor, whether you received my note telling you of the date and time
of your inspec--"
"Obviously I received it, or I would have asked you what you are doing in my classroom," said
exchanged looks of glee. "As I was saying: today, we shall be practicing the altogether more
difficult Vanishment of mice. Now, the Vanishing Spell -"
"Hem, hem."
"I wonder," said Professor McGonagall in cold fury, turning on Professor Umbridge, "how you
do not generally permit people to talk when I am talking."
"As I was saying: the Vanishing Spell becomes more difficult with the complexity of the animal
your mind on your dinner. So - you know the incantation, let me see what you can do..."
"How she can lecture me about not losing my temper with Umbridge!" Harry muttered to Ron
"Well, it's a start," said Ron, holding up a long wriggling mouse-tail and dropping it back into the box Lavender was passing around.
"How long have you been teaching at Hogwarts?" Professor Umbridge asked.
"Thirty-nine years this December," said Professor McGonagall brusquely, snapping her bag shut.
"Very well," she said, "you will receive the results of your inspection in ten days' time."
"I can hardly wait," said Professor McGonagall, in a coldly indifferent voice, and she strode off
towards the door. "Hurry up, you three," she added, sweeping Harry, Ron and Hermione before
"You do not usually take this class, is that correct?" Harry heard her ask as they arrived at the
"Quite correct," said Professor Grubbly-Plank, hands behind her back and bouncing on the balls
of her feet. "I am a substitute teacher standing in for Professor Hagrid."
"Hmm," said Professor Umbridge, dropping her voice, though Harry could still hear her quite
clearly. "I wonder - the Headmaster seems strangely reluctant to give me any information on the
matter - can you tell me what is causing Professor Hagrid's very extended leave of absence?"
"Fraid I can't," said Professor Grubbly-Plank breezily. "Don't know anything more about it than
accepted. That's as much as I know. Well... shall I get started then?"
"Yes, please do," said Professor Umbridge, scribbling on her clipboard.
"Overall," said Professor Umbridge, returning to Professor Grubbly-Plank's side after a lengthy
interrogation of Dean Thomas, "how do you, as a temporary member of staff- an objective
enough support from the school management?"
"Oh, yes, Dumbledore's excellent," said Professor Grubbly-Plank heartily. "Yes, I'm very happy
with the way things are run, very happy indeed."
Looking politely incredulous, Umbridge made a tiny note on her clipboard and went on, "And
Hagrid does not return?"
"Oh, I'll take them through the creatures that most often come up in OWL," said Professor
Grubbly-Plank. "Not much left to do - they've studied unicorns and Nifflers, I thought we'd
cover Porlocks and Kneazles, make sure they can recognize Crups and Knarls, you know..."
"Well, you seem to know what you're doing, at any rate," said Professor Umbridge, making a
even less when she put her next question to Goyle. "Now, I hear there have been injuries in this
class?"
"That was me," he said. "I was slashed by a Hippogriff."
"A Hippogriff?" said Professor Umbridge, now scribbling frantically.
"Only because he was too stupid to listen to what Hagrid told him to do," said Harry angrily.
"Another nights detention, I think," she said softly. "Well, thank you very much, Professor
within ten days."
"Jolly good," said Professor Grubbly-Plank, and Professor Umbridge set off back across the lawn to the castle.
"Here," she said anxiously, pushing a small bowl of yellow liquid towards him, "soak your hand
in that, it's a solution of strained and pickled Murtlap tentacles, it should help."
"Thanks," he said gratefully, scratching behind Crookshanks's ears with his left hand.
"I still reckon you should complain about this," said Ron in a low voice.
"No," said Harry flatly.
"McGonagall would go nuts if she knew --"
"Yeah, she probably would," said Harry dully. "And how long do you reckon it'd take Umbridge
immediately?"
"She's an awful woman," said Hermione in a small voice. "Awful. You know, I was just saying
to Ron when you came in... we've got to do something about her."
"I suggested poison," said Ron grimly.
"No... I mean, something about what a dreadful teacher she is, and how we're not going to learn
any Defense from her at all," said Hermione.
"Well, what can we do about that?" said Ron, yawning. "It's too late, isn't it? She's got the job,
she's here to stay. Fudge'll make sure of that."
"Well," said Hermione tentatively. "You know, I was thinking today..." she shot a slightly
nervous look at Harry and then plunged on, "I was thinking that - maybe the time's come when
we should just - just do it ourselves."
"Do what ourselves?" said Harry suspiciously, still floating his hand in the essence of Murtlap
"Well - learn Defense Against the Dark Arts ourselves," said Hermione.
"Come off it," groaned Ron. "You want us to do extra work? D'you realize Harry and I are
behind on homework again and it's only the second week?"
"But this is much more important than homework!" said Hermione.
"I didn't think there was anything in the universe more important than homework!" said Ron.
"Don't be silly, of course there is," said Hermione, and Harry saw, with an ominous feeling, that
her face was suddenly alight with the kind of fervour that SPEW usually inspired in her. "It's
whole year -"
"We can't do much by ourselves," said Ron in a defeated voice. "I mean, all right, we can go and
look jinxes up in the library and try and practice them, I suppose -"
"No, I agree, we've gone past the stage where we can just learn things out of books"' said
Hermione. "We need a teacher, a proper one, who can show us how to use the spells and correct
us if we're going wrong."
"If you're talking about Lupin..." Harry began.
"No, no, I'm not talking about Lupin," said Hermione. "He's too busy with the Order and,
enough."
"Who, then?" said Harry, frowning at her.
"Isn't it obvious?" she said. "I'm talking about you, Harry."
"About me what?" said Harry.
"I'm talking about you teaching us Defense Against the Dark Arts."
He was frowning slightly, apparently thinking. Then he said, "That's an idea."
"What's an idea?" said Harry.
"You," said Ron. "Teaching us to do it."
"But..."
"But I'm not a teacher, I can't -"
"Harry, you're the best in the year at Defense Against the Dark Arts," said Hermione.
"Me?" said Harry, now grinning more broadly than ever. "No I'm not, you've beaten me in every test -"
"Actually, I haven't," said Hermione coolly. "You beat me in our third year - the only year we
results, Harry. Think what you've done!"
"How d'you mean?"
"You know what, I'm not sure I want someone this stupid teaching me," Ron said to Hermione,
"Let's think," he said, pulling a face like Goyle concentrating. "Uh... first year - you saved the
Sorcerer's Stone from You-Know-Who."
"But that was luck," said Harry, "it wasn't skill."
"Second year," Ron interrupted, "you killed the Basilisk and destroyed Riddle."
"Yeah, but if Fawkes hadn't turned up, I -"
"Third year," said Ron, louder still, "you fought off about a hundred Dementors at once -"
"You know that was a fluke, if the Time-Turner hadn't -"
"Last year," Ron said, almost shouting now, "you fought off You-Know-Who again-"
"Listen to me!" said Harry, almost angrily, because Ron and Hermione were both smirking now.
"Just listen to me, all right? It sounds great when you say it like that, but all that stuff was luck - I
think of, and I nearly always had help -"
"Don't sit there grinning like you know better than I do, I was there, wasn't I?" he said heatedly.
"I know what went on, all right? And I didn't get through any of that because I was brilliant at
doing - STOP LAUGHING!"
"You don't know what it's like! You - neither of you - you've never had to face him, have you?
been if Voldemort hadn't needed me -"
"We weren't saying anything like that, mate," said Ron, looking aghast. "We weren't having a go at Diggory, we didn't - you've got the wrong end of the -"
"Harry," she said timidly, "don't you see? This... this is exactly why we need you... we need to
know what it's r-really like... facing him... facing V-Voldemort."
"Well... think about it," said Hermione quietly. "Please?"
"Well, I'm off to bed," she said, in a voice that was clearly as natural as she could make it.
"Erm... night."
"Coming?" he said awkwardly to Harry.
"Yeah," said Harry. "In... in a minute. I'll just clear this up."
"Reparo," Harry muttered, pointing his wand at the broken pieces of china. They flew back
"I was wondering," Hermione said suddenly, "whether you'd thought any more about Defense
Against the Dark Arts, Harry."
"Course I have," said Harry grumpily, "can't forget it, can we, with that hag teaching us -"
"I meant the idea Ron and I had -" Ron cast her an alarmed, threatening kind of look. She
frowned at him, "- Oh, all right, the idea I had then - about you teaching us."
"Well," he said slowly, when he could no longer pretend to find Asiatic Anti-Venoms interesting, "yeah, I - I've thought about it a bit."
"And?" said Hermione eagerly.
"I dunno," said Harry, playing for time. He looked up at Ron.
"I thought it was a good idea from the start," said Ron, who seemed keener to join in this
"You did listen to what I said about a load of it being luck, didn't you?"
"Yes, Harry," said Hermione gently, "but all the same, there's no point pretending that you're not good at Defense Against the Dark Arts, because you are. You were the only person last year
who could throw off the Imperius Curse completely, you can produce a Patronus, you can do all sorts of stuff that full-grown wizards can't, Viktor always said -"
Ron looked round at her so fast he appeared to crick his neck. Rubbing it, he said, "Yeah? What
did Vicky say?"
"Ho ho," said Hermione in a bored voice. "He said Harry knew how to do stuff even he didn't,
and he was in the final year at Durmstrang."
"You're not still in contact with him, are you?"
"So what if I am" said Hermione coolly, though her face was a little pink. "I can have a pen-pal
if I -"
"He didn't only want to be your pen-pal," said Ron accusingly.
said to Harry, "Well, what do you think? Will you teach us?"
"Just you and Ron, yeah?"
"Well," said Hermione, looking a mite anxious again. "Well... now, don't fly off the handle
doesn't seem fair if we don't offer the chance to other people."
Harry considered this for a moment, then said, "Yeah, but I doubt anyone except you two would
want to be taught by me. I'm a nutter, remember?"
"Well, I think you might be surprised how many people would be interested in hearing what
you've got to say" said Hermione seriously. "Look," she leaned towards him - Ron, who was still watching her with a frown on his face, leaned forwards to listen too - "you know the first
interested to meet us in the village and we can talk it over?"
"Why do we have to do it outside school?" said Ron.
"Because," said Hermione, returning to the diagram of the Chinese Chomping Cabbage she was
copying, "I don't think Umbridge would be very happy if she found out what we were up to."
"Well, you can't blame him for wanting to get out and about," said Ron, when Harry discussed
his fears with him and Hermione. "I mean, he's been on the run for over two years, hasn't he, and I know that can't have been a laugh, but at least he was free, wasn't he? And now he's just shut up all the time with that ghastly elf."
"The trouble is," she said to Harry, "until V-Voldemort - oh, for heaven's sake, Ron - comes out
going to realize Sirius is innocent until they accept that Dumbledore's been telling the truth about him all along. And once the fools start catching real Death Eaters again, it'll be obvious Sirius isn't one... I mean, he hasn't got the Mark, for one thing."
"I don't reckon he'd be stupid enough to turn up," said Ron bracingly. "Dumbledore'd go mad if
he did and Sirius listens to Dumbledore even if he doesn't like what he hears."
When Harry continued to look worried, Hermione said, "Listen, Ron and I have been sounding
there are a couple who seem interested. We've told them to meet us in Hogsmeade."
"Right," said Harry vaguely, his mind still on Sirius.
"Don't worry, Harry" Hermione said quietly. "You've got enough on your plate without Sirius,
too."
"Er - why was Filch sniffing you?" asked Ron, as he, Harry and Hermione set off at a brisk pace
"I suppose he was checking for the smell of Dungbombs," said Harry with a small laugh. "I
forgot to tell you..."
"He said he was tipped off you were ordering Dungbombs? But who tipped him off?"
"I dunno," said Harry, shrugging. "Maybe Malfoy, he'd think it was a laugh."
"Malfoy?" said Hermione, skeptically. "Well... yes... maybe..."
"Where are we going, anyway?" Harry asked. "The Three Broomsticks?"
"Oh - no," said Hermione, coming out of her reverie, "no, it's always packed and really noisy.
so I don't think we'll be overheard."
"Well, come on," said Hermione, slightly nervously. Harry led the way inside.
Harry remembered Hagrid mentioning this pub in his first year: "Yeh get a lot o' funny folk in
the Hogs Head" he had said, explaining how he had won a dragon's egg from a hooded stranger
"I don't know about this, Hermione," Harry muttered, as they crossed to the bar. He was looking
particularly at the heavily veiled witch. "Has it occurred to you Umbridge might be under that?"
"Umbridge is shorter than that woman," she said quietly. "And anyway, even if Umbridge does
we parade what we're doing."
"No," said Harry dryly, "especially as it's not exactly a homework group you're planning, is it?"
"What?" he grunted.
"Three Butterbeers, please," said Hermione.
"Six Sickles," he said.
"I'll get them," said Harry quickly, passing over the silver. The barman's eyes traveled over
"You know what?" Ron murmured, looking over at the bar with enthusiasm. "We could order
wanted to try Firewhisky -"
"You - are - a -prefect," snarled Hermione.
"Oh," said Ron, the smile fading from his face. "Yeah..."
"So, who did you say is supposed to be meeting us?" Harry asked, wrenching open the rusty top
"Just a couple of people," Hermione repeated, checking her watch and looking anxiously towards the door. "I told them to be here about now and I'm sure they all know where it is - oh, look, this might be them now."
"A couple of people?" said Harry hoarsely to Hermione. "A couple of people?"
"Yes, well, the idea seemed quite popular," said Hermione happily, "Ron, do you want to pull up
some more chairs?"
"Hi," said Fred, reaching the bar first and counting his companions quickly, "could we have...
twenty-five Butterbeers, please?"
"Cheers," said Fred, handing them out. "Cough up, everyone, I haven't got enough gold for all of
these..."
"What have you been telling people?" he said in a low voice. "What are they expecting?"
"I've told you, they just want to hear what you've got to say," said Hermione soothingly; but
Harry continued to look at her so furiously that she added quickly, "you don't have to do
anything yet, I'll speak to them first."
"Hi, Harry," said Neville, beaming and taking a seat opposite him.
"Er," said Hermione, her voice slightly higher than usual out of nerves. "Well - er - hi."
"Well... erm... well, you know why you're here. Erm... well, Harry here had the idea - I mean"
(Harry had thrown her a sharp look) "I had the idea - that it might be good if people who wanted
that Umbridge is doing with us -" (Hermione's voice became suddenly much stronger and more
confident) "- because nobody could call that Defense Against the Dark Arts -" ("Hear, hear," said Anthony Goldstein, and Hermione looked heartened) "- Well, I thought it would be good if we, well, took matters into our own hands."
She paused, looked sideways at Harry, and went on, "And by that I mean learning how to defend
ourselves properly, not just in theory but doing the real spells -"
"You want to pass your Defense Against the Dark Arts OWL too, though, I bet?" said Michael
"Of course I do," said Hermione at once. "But more than that, I want to be properly trained in
defense because... because..." she took a great breath and finished, "because Lord Voldemort is
back."
"Well... that's the plan, anyway" said Hermione. "If you want to join us, we need to decide how
we're going to -"
"Where's the proof You-Know-Who's back?" said the blond Hufflepuff player in a rather
"Well, Dumbledore believes it -" Hermione began.
"You mean, Dumbledore believes him," said the blond boy, nodding at Harry.
"Who are you?" said Ron, rather rudely.
"Zacharias Smith," said the boy, "and I think we've got the right to know exactly what makes him say You-Know-Who's back."
"Look," said Hermione, intervening swiftly, "that's really not what this meeting was supposed to
be about -"
"It's okay, Hermione," said Harry.
"What makes me say You-Know-Who's back?" he repeated, looking Zacharias straight in the
face. "I saw him. But Dumbledore told the whole school what happened last year, and if you
anyone."
Zacharias said dismissively, "All Dumbledore told us last year was that Cedric Diggory got
-"
"If you've come to hear exactly what it looks like when Voldemort murders someone I can't help
you," Harry said. His temper, always so close to the surface these days, was rising again. He did
"I don't want to talk about Cedric Diggory, all right? So if that's what you're here for, you might as well clear out."
"So," said Hermione, her voice very high-pitched again. "So... like I was saying... if you want to learn some defense, then we need to work out how we're going to do it, how often we're going to meet and where we're going to -"
"Is it true," interrupted the girl with the long plait down her back, looking at Harry, "that you can produce a Patronus?"
"Yeah," said Harry slightly defensively.
"A corporeal Patronus?"
"Er - you don't know Madam Bones, do you?" he asked.
"She's my auntie," she said. "I'm Susan Bones. She told me about your hearing. So - is it really
true? You make a stag Patronus?"
"Yes," said Harry.
"Blimey, Harry!" said Lee, looking deeply impressed. "I never knew that!"
"Mum told Ron not to spread it around," said Fred, grinning at Harry. "She said you got enough
attention as it was."
"She's not wrong," mumbled Harry, and a couple of people laughed.
"And did you kill a Basilisk with that sword in Dumbledore's office?" demanded Terry Boot. "That's what one of the portraits on the wall told me when I was in there last year..."
"Er - yeah, I did, yeah," said Harry.
Brown said "Wow!" softly. Harry was feeling slightly hot around the collar now; he was
"And in our first year," said Neville to the group at large, "he saved that Sorcerous Stone -"
"Sorcerer's," hissed Hermione.
"Yes, that - from You-Know-Who," finished Neville.
"And that's not to mention," said Cho (Harry's eyes snapped across to her; she was looking at
him, smiling; his stomach did another somersault) "all the tasks he had to get through in the
things..."
"Look," he said, and everyone fell silent at once, " I... I don't want to sound like I'm trying to be
modest or anything, but... I had a lot of help with all that stuff..."
"Not with the dragon, you didn't," said Michael Corner at once. "That was a seriously cool bit of
flying..."
"Yeah, well -" said Harry, feeling it would be churlish to disagree.
"And nobody helped you get rid of those Dementors this summer," said Susan Bones.
"No," said Harry, "no, okay, I know I did bits of it without help, but the point I'm trying to make is -"
"Are you trying to weasel out of showing us any of this stuff?" said Zacharias Smith.
"Here's an idea," said Ron loudly, before Harry could speak, "why don't you shut your mouth?"
"Well, we've all turned up to learn from him and now he's telling us he can't really do any of it,"
"That's not what he said," snarled Fred.
"Would you like us to clean out your ears for you?" enquired George, pulling a long and lethal looking metal instrument from inside one of the Zonko's bags.
"Or any part of your body, really, we're not fussy where we stick this," said Fred.
"Yes, well," said Hermione hastily, "moving on... the point is, are we agreed we want to take
lessons from Harry?"
"Right," said Hermione, looking relieved that something had at last been settled. "Well, then, the
once a week -"
"Hang on," said Angelina, "we need to make sure this doesn't clash with our Quidditch practice."
"No," said Cho, "nor with ours."
"Nor ours," added Zacharias Smith.
"I'm sure we can find a night that suits everyone," aid Hermione, slightly impatiently, "but you
know, this is rather important, we're talking about learning to defend ourselves against V-Voldemort's Death Eaters -"
"Well said!" barked Ernie Macmillan, who Harry had been expecting to speak long before this.
"Personally I think this is really important, possibly more important than anything else we'll do
this year, even with our OWLs coming up!"
He looked around impressively, as though waiting for people to cry "Surely not!" When nobody
spoke, he went on, "I, personally am at a loss to see why the Ministry has foisted such a useless
Who, but to give us a teacher who is trying to actively prevent us from using defensive spells -"
"We think the reason Umbridge doesn't want us trained in Defense Against the Dark Arts," said
Hermione, "is that she's got some... some mad idea that Dumbledore could use the students in
the school as a kind of private army. She thinks he'd mobilize us against the Ministry."
"Well, that makes sense. After all, Cornelius Fudge has got his own private army."
"What?" said Harry, completely thrown by this unexpected piece of information.
"Yes, he's got an army of Heliopaths," said Luna so lemnly.
"No, he hasn't," snapped Hermione.
"Yes, he has," said Luna.
"What are Heliopaths?" asked Neville, looking blank.
"They're spirits of fire," said Luna, her protuberant eyes widening so that she looked madder than ever, "great tall flaming creatures that gallop across the ground burning everything in front of -"
"They don't exist, Neville," said Hermione tartly.
"Oh, yes, they do!" said Luna angrily.
"I'm sorry, but where's the proof of that?" snapped Hermione.
"There are plenty of eye-witness accounts. Just because you're so narrow-minded you need to
have everything shoved under your nose before you -"
"Hem, hem," said Ginny, in such a good imitation of Professor Umbridge that several people
looked around in alarm and then laughed. "Weren't we trying to decide how often we're going to meet and have defense lessons?"
"Yes," said Hermione at once, "yes, we were, you're right, Ginny."
"Well, once a week sounds cool," said Lee Jordan.
"As long as -" began Angelina.
"Yes, yes, we know about the Quidditch," said Hermione in a tense voice. "Well, the other thing
to decide is where we're going to meet..."
"Library?" suggested Katie Bell after a few moments.
"I can't see Madam Pince being too chuffed with us doing jinxes in the library," said Harry.
"Maybe an unused classroom?" said Dean.
"Yeah," said Ron, "McGonagall might let us have hers, she did when Harry was practicing for the Triwizard."
"Right, well, we'll try to find somewhere," said Hermione. "We'll send a message round to
everybody when we've got a time and a place for the first meeting."
"I - I think everybody should write their name down, just so we know who was here. But I also
think," she took a deep breath, "that we all ought to agree not to shout about what we're doing. So if you sign, you're agreeing not to tell Umbridge or anybody else what we're up to."
"Er..." said Zacharias slowly, not taking the parchment that George was trying to pass to him,
"well... I'm sure Ernie will tell me when the meeting is."
"I - well, we are prefects," Ernie burst out. "And if this list was found... well, I mean to say...
you said yourself, if Umbridge finds out -"
"You just said this group was the most important thing you'd do this year," Harry reminded him.
"I - yes," said Ernie, "yes, I do believe that, it ' s just -"
"Ernie, do you really think I'd leave that list lying around?" said Hermione testily.
"No. No, of course not," said Ernie, looking slightly less anxious. "I - yes, of course I'll sign."
"Well, time's ticking on," said Fred briskly, getting to his feet. "George, Lee and I have got items of a sensitive nature to purchase, we'll be seeing you all later."
"Well, I think that went quite well," said Hermione happily, as she, Harry and Ron walked out of
"That Zacharias bloke's a wart," said Ron, who was glowering after the figure of Smith, just
"I don't like him much, either," admitted Hermione, "but he overheard me talking to Ernie and
come if he hadn't been going out with Ginny -"
"He's WHAT?" spluttered Ron, outraged, his ears now resembling curls of raw beef. "She's
going out with - my sister's going - what d'you mean, Michael Corner?"
"Well, that's why he and his friends came, I think - well, they're obviously interested in learning
defense, but if Ginny hadn't told Michael what was going on -"
"When did this - when did she -?"
"They met at the Yule Ball and got together at the end of last year," said Hermione composedly. They had turned into the High Street and she paused outside Scrivenshaft's Quill Shop, where
there was a handsome display of pheasant feather quills in the window. "Hmm... I could do with
a new quill."
"Which one was Michael Corner?" Ron demanded furiously.
"The dark one," said Hermione.
"I didn't like him," said Ron at once.
"Big surprise," said Hermione under her breath.
"But," said Ron, following Hermione along a row of quills in copper pots, "I thought Ginny
fancied Harry!"
"Ginny used to fancy Harry, but she gave up on him months ago. Not that she doesn't like you, of course," she added kindly to Harry while she examined a long black and gold quill.
"So that's why she talks now?" he asked Hermione. "She never used to talk in front of me."
"Exactly," said Hermione. "Yes, I think I'll have this one..."
"Ron," she said severely as she turned and trod on his feet, "this is exactly why Ginny hasn't told
sake."
"What d'you mean? Who's taking anything badly? I'm not going to harp on about anything..."
imprecations about Michael Corner, "And talking about Michael and Ginny... what about Cho
and you?"
"What d'you mean?" said Harry quickly.
"Well," said Hermione, smiling slightly, "she just couldn't keep her eyes off you, could she?"
"Does this mean they're going to shut down the Gobstones Club?" one of them asked his friend.
"I reckon you'll be okay with Gobstones," Ron said darkly, making the second-year jump. "I don't think we're going to be as lucky, though, do you?" he asked Harry as the second-years hurried away.
"This isn't a coincidence," he said, his hands forming fists. "She knows."
"She can't," said Ron at once.
"There were people listening in that pub. And let's face it, we don't know how many of the people who turned up we can trust... any of them could have run off and told Umbridge..."
"Zacharias Smith!" said Ron at once, punching a fist into his hand. "Or - I thought that Michael
Corner had a really shifty look, too -"
"I wonder if Hermione's seen this yet?" Harry said, looking round at the door to the girls'
"Let's go and tell her," said Ron. He bounded forwards, pulled open the door and set off up the
"Er - I don't think we're allowed in the girls' dormitories," said Harry, pulling Ron to his feet and trying not to laugh.
"Oooh, who tried to get upstairs?" they giggled happily, leaping to their feet and ogling Harry
"Me," said Ron, who was still rather disheveled. " I didn't realize that would happen. It's not
fair!" he added to Harry, as the girls headed off for the portrait hole, still giggling madly. "Hermione's allowed in our dormitory, how come we're not allowed -?"
"Well, it's an old-fashioned rule," said Hermione, who had just slid neatly on to a rug in front of
them and was now getting to her feet, "but it says in Hogwarts A History, that the founders
thought boys were less trustworthy than girls. Anyway, why were you trying to get in there?"
"To see you - look at this!" said Ron, dragging her over to the noticeboard.
"Someone must have blabbed to her!" Ron said angrily.
"They can't have done," said Hermione in a low voice.
"You're so naive," said Ron, "you think just because you're all honorable and trustworthy -"
"No, they can't have done, because I put a jinx on that piece of parchment we all signed," said
Hermione grimly. "Believe me, if anyone's run off and told Umbridge, we'll know exactly who
they are and they will really regret it."
"What'll happen to them?" said Ron eagerly.
"Well, put it this way" said Hermione, "it'll make Eloise Midgeon's acne look like a couple of
whether this has been put up in all the houses?"
"Did you see it?"
"D'you reckon she knows?"
"What are we going to do?"
"We're going to do it anyway of course," he said quietly.
"Knew you'd say that"' said George, beaming and thumping Harry on the arm.
"The prefects as well?" said Fred, looking quizzically at Ron and Hermione.
"Of course," said Hermione coolly.
"Here come Ernie and Hannah Abbott," said Ron, looking over his shoulder. "And those
Ravenclaw blokes and Smith... and no one looks very spotty."
"Nevermind spots, the idiots can't come over here now, it'll look really suspicious - sit down!"
"Later! We'll - talk - to - you - later!"
"I'll tell Michael," said Ginny impatiently, swinging herself off her bench, "the fool, honestly..."
"Harry! Ron!"
"It's okay," said Harry quietly, when she was near enough to hear him. "We're still going to -"
"You realize she's including Quidditch in this?" Angelina said over him. "We have to go and ask
permission to re-form the Gryffindor team!"
"What?" said Harry.
"No way," said Ron, appalled.
"You read the sign, it mentions teams too! So listen, Harry... I am saying this for the last time...
more!"
"Okay,okay," said Harry, for Angelina looked as though she was on the verge of tears. "Don't
worry, I'll behave myself..."
"Bet Umbridge is in History of Magic," said Ron grimly, as they set off for Binns's lesson. "She
hasn't inspected Binns yet... bet you anything she's there..."
"What?"
"Oh, I've always loved that owl, she's so beautiful," Harry heard Lavender sigh to Parvati.
"She's hurt!" Harry whispered, bending his head low over her. Hermione and Ron leaned in
closer; Hermione even put down her quill. "Look - there's something wrong with her wing -"
"Professor Binns," said Harry loudly, and everyone in the class turned to look at him. "I'm not
feeling well."
"Not feeling well?" he repeated hazily.
"Not at all well," said Harry firmly getting to his feet with Hedwig concealed behind his back. "I
think I need to go to the hospital wing."
"Yes," said Professor Binns, clearly very much wrong-footed. "Yes... yes, hospital wing... well,
off you go, then, Perkins..."
"You should be in class, Sonny Jim."
"This is urgent," said Harry curtly.
"Ooooh, urgent, is it?" said the other gargoyle in a high-pitched voice. "Well, that's put us in our
place, hasn't it?"
"You haven't been given another detention!" she said at once, her square spectacles flashing
"No, Professor!" said Harry hastily.
"Well then, why are you out of class?"
"It's urgent, apparently," said the second gargoyle snidely.
"I'm looking for Professor Grubbly-Plank," Harry explained. "It's my owl, she's injured."
"Injured owl, did you say?"
"Yes," said Harry, lifting Hedwig carefully off his shoulder, "she turned up after the other post
owls and her wing's all funny, look -"
"Hmm," said Professor Grubbly-Plank, her pipe waggling slightly as she talked. "Looks like
go for birds, of course, but Hagrid's got the Hogwarts Thestrals well-trained not to touch owls."
going to be all right. Professor McGonagall, however, looked sharply at Harry and said, "Do you
know how far this owl's traveled, Potter?"
"Er," said Harry. "From London, I think."
eye, to examine Hedwig's wing closely. "I should be able to sort this out if you leave her with
me, Potter," she said, "she shouldn't be flying long distances for a few days, in any case."
"Er - right - thanks"' said Harry, just as the bell rang for break.
"No problem," said Professor Grubbly-Plank gruffly, turning back into the staff room.
"Just a moment, Wilhelmina!" said Professor McGonagall. "Potters letter!"
"Oh yeah!" said Harry, who had momentarily forgotten the scroll tied to Hedwig's leg. Professor
"Potter!"
"Yes, Professor?"
"Bear in mind," she said quickly and quietly, her eyes on the scroll in his hand, "that channels of
communication in and out of Hogwarts may be being watched, won't you?"
"I -" said Harry, but the flood of students rolling along the corridor was almost upon him.
"Is Hedwig okay?" asked Hermione anxiously, the moment he was within earshot.
"Where did you take her?" asked Ron.
"To Grubbly-Plank," said Harry. "And I met McGonagall... listen..."
"What?" said Harry, looking from Ron to Hermione and back again.
"Well, I was just saying to Ron... what if someone had tried to intercept Hedwig? I mean, she's
never been hurt on a flight before, has she?"
"Who's the letter from, anyway?" asked Ron, taking the note from Harry.
"Snuffles"' said Harry quietly.
"'Same time, same place?' Does he mean the fire in the common room?"
"Obviously," said Hermione, also reading the note. She looked uneasy. "I just hope nobody else
has read this..."
"But it was still sealed and everything," said Harry, trying to convince himself as much as her.
"And nobody would understand what it meant if they didn't know where we'd spoken to him
before, would they?"
"I don't know," said Hermione anxiously, hitching h er bag back over her shoulder as the bell
rang again, "it wouldn't be exactly difficult to re-seal the scroll by magic... and if anyone's
without that being intercepted, too!"
"Yeah, Umbridge gave the Slytherin Quidditch team permission to continue playing
interesting to see whether Gryffindor are allowed to keep playing, won't it?"
"Don't rise," Hermione whispered imploringly to Harry and Ron, who were both watching
Malfoy, faces set and fists clenched. "It's what he wants."
"I mean," said Malfoy, raising his voice a little more, his grey eyes glittering malevolently in
Harry and Ron's direction, "if it's a question of influence with the Ministry, I don't think they've
brains have been addled by magic."
"Neville, no!"
"Help me!" Harry flung at Ron, managing to get an arm around Neville's neck and dragging him
"Not... funny... don't... Mungo's... show... him..."
"Fighting, Potter, Weasley, Longbottom?" Snape said in his cold, sneering voice. "Ten points from Gryffindor. Release Longbottom, Potter, or it will be detention. Inside, all of you."
"I had to stop you," Harry gasped, picking up his bag. "Crabbe and Goyle would've torn you
apart."
"What in the name of Merlin," said Ron slowly, as they followed Neville, "was that about?"
"You will notice," said Snape, in his low, sneering voice, "that we have a guest with us today."
"We are continuing with our Strengthening Solution today. You will find your mixtures as you
instructions -" he waved his wand again "- on the board. Carry on."
"Salamander blood, Harry!" Hermione moaned, grabbing his wrist to prevent him adding the
wrong ingredient for the third time, "not pomegranate juice!"
"Right," said Harry vaguely, putting down the bottle and continuing to watch the corner.
Umbridge had just got to her feet. "Ha," he said softly, as she strode between two lines of desks
"Well, the class seem fairly advanced for their level," she said briskly to Snape's back. "Though I would question whether it is advisable to teach them a potion like the Strengthening Solution. I
think the Ministry would prefer it if that was removed from the syllabus."
"Now... how long have you been teaching at Hogwarts?" she asked, her quill poised over her
"Fourteen years," Snape replied. His expression was unfathomable. Harry, watching him closely,
"You applied first for the Defense Against the Dark Arts post, I believe?" Professor Umbridge
"Yes," said Snape quietly.
"But you were unsuccessful?"
"Obviously"
"And you have applied regularly for the Defense Against the Dark Arts post since you first
joined the school, I believe?"
"Yes," said Snape quietly, barely moving his lips. He looked very angry.
"Do you have any idea why Dumbledore has consistently refused to appoint you?" asked
"I suggest you ask him," said Snape jerkily.
"Oh, I shall," said Professor Umbridge, with a sweet smile.
"I suppose this is relevant?" Snape asked, his black eyes narrowed.
"Oh yes," said Professor Umbridge, "yes, the Ministry wants a thorough understanding of
teachers - er - backgrounds."
"No marks again, then, Potter" said Snape maliciously, emptying Harry's cauldron with a wave
of his wand. "You will write me an essay on the correct composition of this potion, indicating
how and why you went wrong, to be handed in next lesson, do you understand?"
"Yes," said Harry furiously. Snape had already given them homework and he had Quidditch
"Maybe I'll skive off Divination," he said glumly, as they stood in the courtyard after lunch, the
wind whipping at the hems of robes and brims of hats. "I'll pretend to be ill and do Snape's essay
instead, then I won't have to stay up half the night."
"You can't skive off Divination," said Hermione severely.
"Hark who's talking, you walked out of Divination, you hate Trelawney!" said Ron indignantly.
"I don't hate her," said Hermione loftily. "I just think she's an absolutely appalling teacher and a
anything else today!"
"Well, carry on!" said Professor Trelawney loudly, her voice high-pitched and somewhat
hysterical, "you know what to do! Or am I such a sub-standard teacher that you have never
learned how to open a book?"
magnified eyes full of angry tears, he leaned his head closer to Ron's and muttered, "I think she's got the results of her inspection back."
"Professor?" said Parvati Patil in a hushed voice (she and Lavender had always rather admired
Professor Trelawney). "Professor, is there anything - er - wrong?"
"Wrong!" cried Professor Trelawney in a voice throbbing with emotion. "Certainly not! I have
leveled... but no, there is nothing wrong, certainly not!"
"I say nothing," she choked, "of sixteen years of devoted service... it has passed, apparently,
unnoticed... but I shall not be insulted, no, I shall not!"
"But, Professor, who's insulting you?" asked Parvati timidly.
"The Establishment!" said Professor Trelawney, in a deep, dramatic, wavering voice. "Yes, those
have always been feared, always persecuted... it is - alas -our fate."
"Professor," said Parvati, "do you mean... is it something Professor Umbridge -?"
"Do not speak to me about that woman!" cried Professor Trelawney, leaping to her feet, her
beads rattling and her spectacles flashing. "Kindly continue with your work!"
"... may well choose to leave... the indignity of it... on probation... we shall see... how she
dares..."
"You and Umbridge have got something in common," Harry told Hermione quietly when they
met again in Defense Against the Dark Arts. "She obviously reckons Trelawney's an old fraud,
too... looks like she's put her on probation."
"Good afternoon, class."
"Good afternoon, Professor Umbridge," they chanted dully.
"Wands away, please."
"Please turn to page thirty-four of Defensive Magical Theory and read the third chapter, entitled
'Case for Non-Offensive Responses to Magical Attack'. There will be -"
"- no need to talk," Harry, Ron and Hermione said together, under their breaths.
"No Quidditch practice," said Angelina in hollow tones when Harry, Ron and Hermione entered
"But I kept my temper!" said Harry, horrified. "I didn't say anything to her, Angelina, I swear, I -"
"I know, I know," said Angelina miserably. "She just said she needed a bit of time to consider."
"Consider what?" said Ron angrily. "She's given the Slytherins permission, why not us?"
"Well," said Hermione, "look on the bright side - at least now you'll have time to do Snape's
essay!"
"That's a bright side, is it?" snapped Harry, while Ron stared incredulously at Hermione. "No
Quidditch practice, and extra Potions?"
"Just go and stop them, then!" he said irritably, after crossing out the wrong weight of powdered
"I can't, they're not technically doing anything wrong," said Hermione through gritted teeth.
"They're quite within their rights to eat the foul things themselves and I can't find a rule that says the other idiots aren't entitled to buy them, not unless they're proven to be dangerous in some way and it doesn't look as though they are."
"You know, I don't get why Fred and George only got three OWLs each," said Harry, watching
as Fred, George and Lee collected gold from the eager crowd. "They really know their stuff."
"Oh, they only know flashy stuff that's of no real use to anyone," said Hermione disparagingly.
"No real use?" said Ron in a strained voice. "Hermione, they've made about twenty-six Galleons
already."
"Sirius!" he said.
"Hi," he said, grinning.
"Hi," chorused Harry, Ron and Hermione, all three kneeling down on the hearthrug. Crookshanks purred loudly and approached the fire, trying, despite the heat, to put his face close
"How're things?" said Sirius.
"Not that good," said Harry, as Hermione pulled Crookshanks back to stop him singeing his
whiskers. "The Ministry's forced through another decree, which means we're not allowed to have Quidditch teams -"
"Or secret Defense Against the Dark Arts groups?" said Sirius.
"How did you know about that?" Harry demanded.
"You want to choose your meeting places more carefully," said Sirius, grinning still more
broadly. "The Hog's Head, I ask you."
"Well, it was better than the Three Broomsticks!" said Hermione defensively. "That's always
packed with people -"
"Which means you'd have been harder to overhear," said Sirius. "You've got a lot to learn,
Hermione."
"Who overheard us?" Harry demanded.
"Mundungus, of course," said Sirius, and when they all looked puzzled he laughed. "He was the
witch under the veil."
"That was Mundungus?" Harry said, stunned. "What was he doing in the Hog's Head?"
"What do you think he was doing?" said Sirius impatiently. "Keeping an eye on you, of course."
"I'm still being followed?" asked Harry angrily.
"Yeah, you are," said Sirius, "and just as well, isn't it, if the first thing you're going to do on your weekend off is organize an illegal defense group."
"Why was Dung hiding from us?" asked Ron, sounding disappointed. "We'd've liked to've seen
him."
"He was banned from the Hog's Head twenty years ago," said Sirius, "and that barman's got a
message from your mother."
"Oh yeah?" said Ron, sounding apprehensive.
"She says on no account whatsoever are you to take part in an illegal secret Defense Against the
worrying about that right now. She also" (Sirius's eyes turned to the other two) "advises Harry
trouble, and she can't say it for herself because she's on duty tonight."
"On duty doing what?" said Ron quickly.
"Never you mind, just stuff for the Order," said Sirius. "So it's fallen to me to be the messenger
and make sure you tell her I passed it all on, because I don't think she trusts me to."
"So, you want me to say I'm not going to take part in the Defense group?" he muttered finally.
"Me? Certainly not!" said Sirius, looking surprised. "I think it's an excellent idea!"
"You do?" said Harry, his heart lifting.
"Of course I do!" said Sirius. "D'you think your father and I would've lain down and taken orders from an old hag like Umbridge?"
"But - last term all you did was tell me to be careful and not take risks -"
"Last year, all the evidence was that someone inside Hogwarts was trying to kill you, Harry!"
said Sirius impatiently. "This year, we know there's someone outside Hogwarts who'd like to kill us all, so I think learning to defend yourselves properly is a very good idea!"
"And if we do get expelled?" Hermione asked, a quizzical look on her face.
"Hermione, this whole thing was your idea!" said Harry, staring at her.
"I know it was. I just wondered what Sirius thought," she said, shrugging.
"Well, better expelled and able to defend yourselves than sitting safely in school without a clue,"
"Hear, hear," said Harry and Ron enthusiastically.
"So," said Sirius, "how are you organizing this group? Where are you meeting?"
"Well, that's a bit of a problem now," said Harry. "Dunno where we're going to be able to go."
"How about the Shrieking Shack?" suggested Sirius.
"Hey, that's an idea!" said Ron excitedly, but Hermione made a skeptical noise and all three of
"Well, Sirius, it's just that there were only four of you meeting in the Shrieking Shack when you
were at school," said Hermione, "and all of you could transform into animals and I suppose you
Cloak as an Invisibility Marquee -"
"Fair point," said Sirius, looking slightly crestfallen. "Well, I'm sure you'll come up with
fourth floor, you might have enough space to practice jinxes in there."
"Fred and George told me it's blocked," said Harry, shaking his head. "Caved in or something."
"Oh..." said Sirius, frowning. "Well, I'll have a think and get back to -"
"Sirius?" said Harry anxiously.
"Why did he -?"
"Umbridge has been reading your mail, Harry. There's no other explanation."
"You think Umbridge attacked Hedwig?" he said, outraged.
"I'm almost certain of it," said Hermione grimly. "Watch your frog, it's escaping."
the table - "Accio!" - and it zoomed gloomily back into his hand.
"I've been suspecting this ever since Filch accused you of ordering Dungbombs, because it
seemed such a stupid lie," Hermione whispered. "I mean, once your letter had been read it would
have been quite clear you weren't ordering them, so you wouldn't have been in trouble at all - it's a bit of a feeble joke, isn't it? But then I thought, what if somebody just wanted an excuse to read your mail? Well then, it would be a perfect way for Umbridge to manage it - tip off Filch, let him do the dirty work and confiscate the letter, then either find a way of stealing it from him or else demand to see it - I don't think Filch would object, when's he ever stuck up for a student's rights? Harry, you're squashing your frog."
"It was a very, very close call last night," said Hermione. "I just wonder if Umbridge knows how
close it was. Silencio."
"If she'd caught Snuffles -"
"- He'd probably be back in Azkaban this morning." He waved his wand without really
"Silencio!" said Hermione hastily, pointing her wand at Harry's frog, which deflated silently
before them. "Well, he mustn't do it again, that's all. I just don't know how we're going to let
him know. We can't send him an owl."
"I don't reckon he'll risk it again," said Ron. "He's not stupid, he knows she nearly got
him. Silencio."
"Silencio. SILENCIO!"
"Its the way you're moving your wand," said Hermione, watching Ron critically, "you don't want to wave it, it's more a sharp jab."
"Ravens are harder than frogs," said Ron through clenched teeth.
"Fine, let's swap," said Hermione, seizing Rons raven and replacing it with her own fat bullfrog.
"Silencio!" The raven continued to open and close its sharp beak, but no sound came out.
"Very good, Miss Granger!" said Professor Flitwick's squeaky little voice, making Harry, Ron
and Hermione all jump. "Now, let me see you try, Mr. Weasley."
"Wha--? Oh - oh, right," said Ron, very flustered. "Er - silencio!"
"I've got permission!" she said. "To re-form the Quidditch team!"
"Excellent!" said Ron and Harry together.
"Yeah," said Angelina, beaming. "I went to McGonagall and I think she might have appealed to
o'clock tonight, all right, because we've got to make up time. You realize we're only three weeks away from our first match?"
"Hope this clears up. What's up with you, Hermione?"
"Just thinking..." she said, still frowning at the rain-washed window.
"About Siri-- Snuffles?" said Harry.
"No... not exactly..." said Hermione slowly. "More... wondering... I suppose we're doing the
right thing... I think... aren't we?"
"Well, that clears that up," said Ron. "It would've been really annoying if you hadn't explained
yourself properly."
"I was just wondering," she said, her voice stronger now, "whether we're doing the right thing,
starting this Defense Against the Dark Arts group."
"What?" said Harry and Ron together.
"Hermione, it was your idea in the first place!" said Ron indignantly.
"I know," said Hermione, twisting her fingers together. "But after talking to Snuffles..."
"But he's all for it," said Harry.
"Yes," said Hermione, staring at the window again. "Yes, that's what made me think maybe it
wasn't a good idea after all..."
"Let's get this straight," said Harry angrily, as t hey put their bags back on the floor, "Sirius agrees with us, so you don't think we should do it any more?"
Hermione looked tense and rather miserable. Now staring at her own hands, she said, "Do you
honestly trust his judgment?"
"Yes, I do!" said Harry at once. "He's always given us great advice!"
"You don't think he has become... sort of... reckless... since he's been cooped up in Grimmauld
Place? You don't think he's... kind of... living through us?"
"What d'you mean, 'through us'?" Harry retorted.
"I mean... well, I think he'd love to be forming secret Defense societies right under the nose of
so I think he's keen to kind of... egg us on."
"Sirius is right," he said, "you do sound just like my mother."
"... but I bet she'd know what we'd done," Fred said out of the corner of his mouth. "If only I
hadn't offered to sell her some Puking Pastilles yesterday."
"We could try the Fever Fudge," George muttered, "no one's seen that yet -"
"Does it work?" enquired Ron hopefully, as the hammering of rain on the roof intensified and
"Well, yeah," said Fred, "your temperature'll go right up."
"But you get these massive pus-filled boils, too," said George, "and we haven't worked out how
to get rid of them yet."
"I can't see any boils," said Ron, staring at the, twins.
"No, well, you wouldn't," said Fred darkly, "they're not in a place we generally display to the
public."
"But they make sitting on a broom a right pain in the -"
"All right, everyone, listen up," said Angelina loudly, emerging from the Captain's office. "I
"Hermione did it," said Harry. He pulled out his wand, tapped his glasses and said, "Impervius!"
"I think we all ought to try that," said Angelina. "If we could just keep the rain off our faces it
would really help visibility - all together, come on - Impervius! okay. Let's go."
"All right, on my whistle," shouted Angelina.
"I think a few of mine have ruptured," said Fred in a hollow voice.
"Mine haven't," said George, through clenched teeth, "they're throbbing like mad... feel bigger if anything."
"OUCH!" said Harry.
"What's up?" said several voices.
"Nothing," he muttered, "I - poked myself in the eye, that's all."
"What happened?" said Ron, the moment Alicia had disappeared through the door. "Was it your
scar?"
"But..." looking scared, Ron strode across to the window and stared out into the rain, "he - he
can't be near us now, can he?"
"No," Harry muttered, sinking on to a bench and rubbing his forehead. "He's probably miles
away. It hurt because... he's... angry."
"Did you see him?" said Ron, looking horrified. "Did you... get a vision, or something?"
"He wants something done, and it's not happening fast enough," he said.
"But... how do you know?" said Ron.
"Is this what it was about last time?" said Ron in a hushed voice. "When your scar hurt in
Umbridge's office? You-Know-Who was angry?"
"What is it, then?"
"Last time, it was because he was pleased," he said. "Really pleased. He thought... something
good was going to happen. And the night before we came back to Hogwarts..." he thought back
"he was furious."
"You could take over from Trelawney, mate," he said in an awed voice.
"I'm not making prophecies," said Harry.
"No, you know what you're doing?" Ron said, sounding both scared and impressed. "Harry, you're reading You-Know-Who's mind!"
"No," said Harry, shaking his head. "It's more like... his mood, I suppose. I'm just getting flashes of what mood he's in. Dumbledore said something like this was happening last year. He said that when Voldemort was near me, or when he was feeling hatred, I could tell. Well, now I'm feeling it when he's pleased, too..."
"You've got to tell someone," said Ron.
"I told Sirius last time."
"Well, tell him about this time!"
"Can't, can I?" said Harry grimly. "Umbridge is watching the owls and the fires, remember?"
"Well then, Dumbledore."
"I've just told you, he already knows," said Harry shortly, getting to his feet, taking his cloak off
his peg and swinging it around him. "There's no point telling him again."
"Dumbledore'd want to know," he said.
"C'mon... we've still got Silencing Charms to practice."
"... he's got other plans... plans he can put into operation very quietly indeed... stuff he can only
get by stealth... like a weapon. Something he didn't have last time."
"Mimbulus mimbletonia," said Ron's voice and Harry came back to his senses just in time to
"Harry Potter, sir!"
"Whozair?" said Harry, sitting upright in his chair. The fire was almost out, the room very dark.
"Dobby has your owl, sir!" said a squeaky voice.
"Dobby?" said Harry thickly, peering through the gloom towards the source of the voice.
"Dobby volunteered to return Harry Potter's owl," said the elf squeakily, with a look of positive
adoration on his face, "Professor Grubbly-Plank says she is all well now, sir." He sank into a
"Thanks, Dobby!" said Harry, stroking Hedwig's head and blinking hard, trying to rid himself of
"Er... have you been taking all the clothes Hermione's been leaving out?"
"Oh, no, sir," said Dobby happily. "Dobby has been taking some for Winky, too, sir."
"Yeah, how is Winky?" asked Harry.
"Winky is still drinking lots, sir," he said sadly, his enormous round green eyes, large as tennis
balls, downcast. "She still does not care for clothes, Harry Potter. Nor do the other house-elves.
mind, sir, for he always hopes to meet Harry Potter and tonight, sir, he has got his wish!" Dobby
sank into a deep bow again. "But Harry Potter does not seem happy," Dobby went on,
straightening up again and looking timidly at Harry. "Dobby heard him muttering in his sleep.
Was Harry Potter having bad dreams?"
"Not really bad," said Harry, yawning and rubbing his eyes. "I've had worse."
drooping, "Dobby wishes he could help Harry Potter, for Harry Potter set Dobby free and Dobby
is much, much happier now."
"You can't help me, Dobby, but thanks for the offer."
"Wait a moment - there is something you can do for me, Dobby," said Harry slowly.
"Name it, Harry Potter, sir!"
"I need to find a place where twenty-eight people can practice Defense Against the Dark Arts
without being discovered by any of the teachers. Especially," Harry clenched his hand on the
book, so that the scars shone pearly white, "Professor Umbridge."
"Dobby knows the perfect place, sir!" he said happily. "Dobby heard tell of it from the other
else as the Room of Requirement!"
"Why?" said Harry curiously.
"Because it is a room that a person can only enter," said Dobby seriously, "when they have real
equipped for the seeker's needs. Dobby has used it, sir," said the elf, dropping his voice and
looking guilty, "when Winky has been very drunk; he has hidden her in the Room of
there when he has run short, sir, and -"
"And if you really needed a bathroom," said Harry, suddenly remembering something
Dumbledore had said at the Yule Ball the previous Christmas, "would it fill itself with chamber
pots?"
"Dobby expects so, sir," said Dobby, nodding earnestly. "It is a most amazing room, sir."
"How many people know about it?" said Harry, sitting up straighter in his chair.
"Very few, sir. Mostly people stumbles across it when they needs it, sir, but often they never
finds it again, for they do not know that it is always there waiting to be called into service, sir."
"It sounds brilliant," said Harry, his heart racing. "It sounds perfect, Dobby. When can you show me where it is?"
"Any time, Harry Potter, sir," said Dobby, looking delighted at Harrys enthusiasm. "We could go
now, if you like!"
"Not tonight, Dobby," said Harry reluctantly, sinking back into his chair. "This is really
exactly where this Room of Requirement is, and how to get in there?"
"Good," said Harry quietly, when she told him, "because we've found somewhere to have our
the Barmy being clubbed by those trolls. Can you tell Katie and Alicia?"
"What?" he said thickly.
"Well... it's just that Dobby's plans aren't always that safe. Don't you remember when he lost
you all the bones in your arm?"
"This room isn't just some mad idea of Dobby's; Dumbledore knows about it, too, he mentioned
it to me at the Yule Ball."
"Dumbledore told you about it?"
"Just in passing," said Harry, shrugging.
"Oh, well, that's all right then," said Hermione briskly and raised no more objections.
"Hold it," Harry warned, unfolding the piece of parchment at the top of the last staircase, tapping
it with his wand and muttering, "I solemnly swear that I am up to no good."
"Filch is on the second floor," said Harry, holding the map close to his eyes, "and Mrs. Norris is
on the fourth."
"And Umbridge?" said Hermione anxiously.
"In her office," said Harry, pointing. "Okay, lets go."
"Okay," said Harry quietly, while a moth-eaten troll paused in his relentless clubbing of the would be ballet teacher to watch them. "Dobby said to walk past this bit of wall three times,
concentrating hard on what we need."
"Harry!" said Hermione sharply, as they wheeled around after their third walk past.
"These will be good when we're practicing Stunning, " said Ron enthusiastically, prodding one of the cushions with his foot.
"And just look at these books!" said Hermione excitedly, running a finger along the spines of the
large leather-bound tomes. "A Compendium of Common Curses and their Counter-Actions...
The Dark Arts Outsmarted... Self-Defensive Spellwork... wow..." She looked around at Harry,
Hermione that what they were doing was right. "Harry, this is wonderful, there's everything we
need here!"
"Whoa," said Dean, staring around, impressed. "What is this place?"
"Well," said Harry, slightly nervously. "This is the place we've found for practice sessions, and
you've - er - obviously found it okay."
"It's fantastic!" said Cho, and several people murmured their agreement.
"It's bizarre," said Fred, frowning around at it. "We once hid from Filch in here, remember,
George? But it was just a broom cupboard then."
"Hey, Harry, what's this stuff?" asked Dean from the rear of the room, indicating the
"Dark detectors," said Harry, stepping between the cushions to reach them. "Basically they all
they can be fooled..."
"Well, I've been thinking about the sort of stuff we ought to do first and - er -" He noticed a
raised hand. "What, Hermione?"
"I think we ought to elect a leader," said Hermione.
"Harry's leader," said Cho at once, looking at Hermione as though she were mad.
"Yes, but I think we ought to vote on it properly," said Hermione, unperturbed. "It makes it
formal and it gives him authority. So - everyone who thinks Harry ought to be our leader?"
"Er - right, thanks," said Harry, who could feel his face burning. "And -what, Hermione?"
"I also think we ought to have a name," she said brightly, her hand still in the air. "It would
promote a feeling of team spirit and unity, don't you think?"
"Can we be the Anti-Umbridge League?" said Angelina hopefully.
"Or the Ministry of Magic are Morons Group?" suggested Fred.
"I was thinking," said Hermione, frowning at Fred, "more of a name that didn't tell everyone
what we were up to, so we can refer to it safely outside meetings."
"The Defense Association?" said Cho. "The D.A. for short, so nobody knows what we're talking
about?"
"Yeah, the D.A.'s good," said Ginny. "Only let's make it stand for Dumbledores Army, because
that's the Ministry's worst fear, isn't it?"
"All in favor of the D.A.?" said Hermione bossily, kneeling up on her cushion to count. "That's a
majority - motion passed!"
"Right," said Harry, when she had sat down again, "shall we get practicing then? I was thinking,
the first thing we should do is Expelliarmus, you know, the Disarming Charm. I know it's pretty basic but I've found it really useful -"
"Oh, please," said Zacharias Smith, rolling his eye s and folding his arms. "I don't think Expelliarmus is exactly going to help us against You-Know-Who, do you?"
"I've used it against him," said Harry quietly. "It saved my life in June."
"But if you think it's beneath you, you can leave," Harry said.
"Okay," said Harry, his mouth slightly drier than usual with all these eyes upon him, "I reckon we should all divide into pairs and practice."
"You can practice with me," Harry told him. "Right-on the count of three, then-one, two, three-"
"Expelliarmus!" said Neville, and Harry, caught unawares, felt his wand fly out of his hand.
"I DID IT!" said Neville gleefully. "I've never done it before - I DID IT!"
"Good one!" said Harry encouragingly, deciding not to point out that in a real duel Nevilles
side. "Listen, Neville, can you take it in turns to practice with Ron and Hermione for a couple of
minutes so I can walk around and see how the rest are doing?"
"Sorry, Harry" said George hastily, when Harry caught his eye. "Couldn't resist."
"Okay, stop!" Harry shouted. "Stop! STOP!"
"That wasn't bad," said Harry, "but there's definite room for improvement." Zacharias Smith
glared at him. "Let's try again."
"Oh no," said Cho rather wildly as he approached. "Expelliarmious! I mean, Expellimellius!! I -
oh, sorry, Marietta!"
"You made me nervous, I was doing all right before then!" Cho told Harry ruefully.
"That was quite good," Harry lied, but when she raised her eyebrows he said, "Well, no, it was
lousy, but I know you can do it properly, I was watching from over there."
"Don't mind her," Cho muttered. "She doesn't really want to be here but I made her come with
mum works for the Ministry."
"What about your parents?" asked Harry.
"Well, they've forbidden me to get on the wrong side of Umbridge, too," said Cho, drawing
herself up proudly. "But if they think I'm not going to fight You-Know-Who after what
happened to Cedric -"
"Well, my dad is very supportive of any anti-Ministry action!" said Luna Lovegood proudly from just behind Harry; evidently she had been eavesdropping on his conversation while Justin Finch-Fletchley attempted to disentangle himself from the robes that had flown up over his head. "He's always saying he'd believe anything of Fudge; I mean, the number of goblins Fudge has had assassinated! And of course he uses the Department of Mysteries to develop terrible poisons,
Slashkilter --"
"Don't ask," Harry muttered to Cho as she opened her mouth, looking puzzled. She giggled.
"Hey, Harry," Hermione called from the other end of the room, "have you checked the time?"
"Expelliarmus" and the last couple of wands clattered to the floor.
"Well, that was pretty good," said Harry, "but we've overrun, we'd better leave it here. Same
time, same place next week?"
"Sooner!' said Dean Thomas eagerly and many people nodded in agreement.
Angelina, however, said quickly. "The Quidditch season's about to start, we need team practices
too!"
"Let's say next Wednesday night, then," said Harry, "we can decide on additional meetings then. Come on, we'd better get going."
"That was really, really good, Harry" said Hermione, when finally it was just her, Harry and Ron
"Yeah, it was!" said Ron enthusiastically, as they slipped out of the door and watched it melt
back into stone behind them. "Did you see me disarm Hermione, Harry?"
"Only once," said Hermione, stung. "I got you loads more than you got me -"
"I did not only get you once, I got you at least three times -"
"Well, if you're counting the one where you tripped over your own feet and knocked the wand
out of my hand -"
"You see the numerals around the edge of the coins?" Hermione said, holding one up for
the torches. "On real Galleons that's just a serial number referring to the goblin who cast the
they'll all change to mimic his."
"Well - I thought it was a good idea," she said uncertainly, "I mean, even if Umbridge asked us to turn out our pockets, there's nothing fishy about carrying a Galleon, is there? But... well, if you don't want to use them -"
"You can do a Protean Charm?" said Terry Boot.
"Yes," said Hermione.
"But that's... that's NEWT standard, that is," he said weakly.
"Oh," said Hermione, trying to look modest. "Oh... well... yes, I suppose it is."
"How come you're not in Ravenclaw?" he demanded, staring at Hermione with something close
to wonder. "With brains like yours?"
"Well, the Sorting Hat did seriously consider putting me in Ravenclaw during my Sorting," said
Hermione brightly, "but it decided on Gryffindor in the end. So, does that mean we're using the
Galleons?"
"You know what these remind me of?"
"No, what's that?"
"The Death Eaters' scars. Voldemort touches one of them, and all their scars burn, and they
know they've got to join him."
"Well... yes," said Hermione quietly, "that is where I got the idea but you'll notice I decided to
engrave the date on bits of metal rather than on our members' skin."
"Yeah... I prefer your way," said Harry, grinning, as he slipped his Galleon into his pocket. "I
suppose the only danger with these is that we might accidentally spend them."
"Fat chance," said Ron, who was examining his own fake Galleon with a slightly mournful air, "I haven't got any real Galleons to confuse it with."
"I think you've got enough to be getting on with at the moment," she said loftily. Nobody could
quite believe their ears until she looked directly at Harry and Ron and said grimly, "I've become
hand it over to Professor Snape, so use the extra time to practice, won't you?"
their snide comments for over four years, so whispers of, "Hey, Potty, I heard Warrington's
sworn to knock you off your broom on Saturday", far from chilling his blood, made him laugh.
"Warrington's aim's so pathetic I'd be more worried if he was aiming for the person next to me,"
passed in the corridors, "Got your bed booked in the hospital wing, Weasley?" he didn't laugh,
"You all right?" said Harry.
"You just need some breakfast," Harry said bracingly. "C'mon."
"I must've been mental to do this," he said in a croaky whisper. "Mental."
"Don't be thick," said Harry firmly, passing him a choice of cereals, "you're going to be fine. It's normal to be nervous."
"I'm rubbish," croaked Ron. "I'm lousy. I can't play to save my life. What was I thinking?"
"Get a grip," said Harry sternly. "Look at that save you made with your foot the other day, even
Fred and George said it was brilliant."
"That was an accident," he whispered miserably. "I didn't mean to do it - I slipped off my broom
accident."
"Well," said Harry, recovering quickly from this unpleasant surprise, "a few more accidents like
that and the game's in the bag, isn't it?"
"How're you feeling?" Ginny asked Ron, who was now staring into the dregs of milk at the
"He's just nervous," said Harry.
"Well, that's a good sign, I never feel you perform as well in exams if you're not a bit nervous,"
"Hello," said a vague and dreamy voice from behind them. Harry looked up: Luna Lovegood had
"I'm supporting Gryffindor," said Luna, pointing un necessarily at her hat. "Look what it does..."
"It's good, isn't it?" said Luna happily. "I wanted to have it chewing up a serpent to represent
Slytherin, you know, but there wasn't time. Anyway... good luck, Ronald!"
"When you're ready" she said, "we're going to go straight down to the pitch, check out conditions and change."
"We'll be there in a bit," Harry assured her. "Ron's just got to have some breakfast."
"Don't let Ron see what's on those Slytherins' badges," she whispered urgently.
"Good luck, Ron," said Hermione, standing on tiptoe and kissing him on the cheek. "And you,
Harry -"
"Okay, I've only just found out the final line-up for Slytherin," said Angelina, consulting a piece of parchment. "Last year's Beaters, Derrick and Bole, have left, but it looks as though Montague's replaced them with the usual gorillas, rather than anyone who can fly particularly well. They're two blokes called Crabbe and goyle, I don't know much about them-"
"We do," said Harry and Ron together.
"Well, they don't look bright enough to tell one end of a broom from the other," said Angelina,
pocketing her parchment, "but then I was always surprised Derrick and Bole managed to find
their way on to the pitch without signposts."
"Crabbe and Goyle are in the same mould," Harry assured her.
"It's time," said Angelina in a hushed voice, looking at her watch. "C'mon everyone... good
luck."
"Captains, shake hands," ordered the referee Madam Hooch, as Angelina and Montague reached
not wince. "Mount your brooms..."
"And it's Johnson - Johnson with the Quaffle, what a player that girl is, I've been saying it for
years but she still won't go out with me -"
"JORDAN!" yelled Professor McGonagall.
"- just a fun fact, Professor, adds a bit of interest - and she's ducked Warrington, she's passed
of Gryffindor reverse-passes to Alicia Spinnet and Spinnet's away -"
"- dodges Warrington, avoids a Bludger - close call, Alicia - and the crowd are loving this, just
listen to them, what's that they're singing?"
"Weasley cannot save a thing, He cannot block a single ring, That's why Slytherins all sing:
Weasley is our King."
"Weasley was born in a bin He always lets the Quaffle in Weasley will make sure we win
Weasley is our King."
"--and Alicia passes back to Angelina!" Lee shouted, and as Harry swerved, his insides boiling
at what he had just heard, he knew Lee was trying to drown out the words of the song. "Come on
now, Angelina -- looks like she's got just the Keeper to beat! - SHE SHOOTS - SHE - aaaah..."
"Weasley is our King, Weasley is our King, He always lets the Quaffle in Weasley is our King."
"- and it's Warrington with the Quaffle, Warrington heading for goal, he's out of Bludger range
with just the Keeper ahead -"
"Weasley cannot save a thing, He cannot block a single ring..."
"- so it's the first test for new Gryffindor Keeper Weasley, brother of Beaters Fred and George,
and a promising new talent on the team - come on, Ron!"
"Slytherin score!" came Lee's voice amid the cheering and booing from the crowds below, "so
that's ten-nil to Slytherin - bad luck, Ron."
"WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN, HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN..."
"- and Gryffindor back in possession and it's Katie Bell tanking up the pitch -" cried Lee
"WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN WEASLEY IS OUR KING..."
"Harry, WHAT ARE YOU DOING?" screamed Angelina, soaring past him to keep up with
Katie. "GET GOING!"
"WEASLEY IS OUR KING, WEASLEY IS OUR KING..."
"WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN..."
"--and it's Warrington again," bellowed Lee, "who passes to Pucey, Pucey's off past Spinnet,
him!"
"WEASLEY CANNOT SAVE A THING..."
"- and Pucey's dodged Alicia again and he's heading straight for goal, stop it, Ron!"
"THAT'S WHY SLYTHERINS ALL SING WEASLEY ISOUR KING."
"- and Katie Bell of Gryffindor dodges Pucey, ducks Montague, nice swerve, Katie, and she
Pucey has the Quaffle"
"-- Pucey throws to Warrington, Warrington to Montague, Montague back to Pucey -Johnson
by a Bludger from Goyle of Slytherin and it's Pucey in possession"
"WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN, HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN"
"WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN"
"Are you all right?"
"Course I am," said Harry grimly, taking her hand and allowing her to pull him to his feet.
"It was that thug Crabbe," said Angelina angrily, "he whacked the Bludger at you the moment he saw you'd got the Snitch - but we won, Harry, we won!"
"Saved Weasley's neck, haven't you?" he said to Harry. "I've never seen a worse Keeper... but
then he was born in a bin... did you like my lyrics, Potter?"
"We wanted to write another couple of verses!" Malfoy called, as Katie and Alicia hugged Harry. "But we couldn't find rhymes for fat and ugly - we wanted to sing about his mother, see-"
"Talk about sour grapes," said Angelina, casting Malfoy a disgusted look.
"- we couldn't fit in useless loser either - for his father, you know -"
"Leave it!" said Angelina at once, taking Fred by the arm. "Leave it, Fred, let him yell, he's just
sore he lost, the jumped-up little -"
"- but you like the Weasleys, don't you, Potter?" said Malfoy, sneering. "Spend holidays there
dragged up by Muggles, even the Weasleys' hovel smells okay -"
"Or perhaps," said Malfoy, leering as he backed away, "you can remember what your mother's
house stank like, Potter, and Weasleys pigsty reminds you of it --"
"Harry! HARRY! GEORGE! NO"
yelled "Impedimenta!" and he was knocked over backwards by the force of the spell, did he
"What do you think you're doing?" screamed Madam Hooch, as Harry leapt to his feet. It seemed to have been her who had hit him with the Impediment Jinx; she was holding her whistle
in one hand and a wand in the other; her broom lay abandoned several feet away. Malfoy was curled up on the ground, whimpering and moaning, his nose bloody; George was sporting a swollen lip; Fred was still being forcibly restrained by the three Chasers, and Crabbe was cackling in the background. "I've never seen behavior like it - back up to the castle, both of you, and straight to your Head of House's office! Go! Now."
"In!" she said furiously, pointing to the door. Harry and George entered. She strode around
"Well?" she said. "I have never seen such a disgraceful exhibition. Two on one! Explain
yourselves!"
"Malfoy provoked us," said Harry stiffly.
"Provoked you?" shouted Professor McGonagall, slamming a fist on to her desk so that her tartan tin slid sideways off it and burst open, littering the floor with Ginger Newts. "He'd just lost, hadn't he? Of course he wanted to provoke you! But what on earth he can have said that justified what you two --"
"He insulted my parents," snarled George. "And Harry's mother."
"But instead of leaving it to Madam Hooch to sort out, you two decided to give an exhibition of
Muggle dueling, did you?" bellowed Professor McGonagall. "Have you any idea what you've -
?"
"Hem, hem."
"May I help, Professor McGonagall?" asked Professor Umbridge in her most poisonously sweet
"Help?" she repeated, in a constricted voice. "What do you mean, help?"
"Why, I thought you might be grateful for a little extra authority"
"You thought wrong," she said, turning her back on Umbridge.
"Now, you two had better listen closely. I do not care what provocation Malfoy offered you, I do
deserve it! And if either of you ever -"
"Hem, hem."
"Yes?"
"I think they deserve rather more than detentions," said Umbridge, smiling still more broadly.
"But unfortunately" she said, with an attempt at a reciprocal smile that made her look as though
she had lockjaw, "it is what I think that counts, as they are in my House, Dolores."
"Well, actually, Minerva," simpered Professor Umbridge, "I think you'll find that what I
think does count. Now, where is it? Cornelius just sent it... I mean," she gave a false little laugh
as she rummaged in her handbag, "the Minister just sent it... ah yes..."
"Hem, hem... 'Educational Decree Number Twenty-five'."
"Not another one!" exclaimed Professor McGonagall violently.
"Well, yes," said Umbridge, still smiling. "As a matter of fact, Minerva, it was you who made me see that we needed a further amendment... you remember how you overrode me, when I was
Class, etc., etc.'"
"So... I really think I will have to ban these two from playing Quidditch ever again," she said,
"Ban us?" he said, and his voice sounded strangely distant. "From playing... ever again?"
"Yes, Mr. Potter, I think a lifelong ban ought to do the trick," said Umbridge, her smile widening
still further as she watched him struggle to comprehend what she had said. "You and Mr. Weasley here. And I think, to be safe, this young man's twin ought to be stopped, too - if his teammates had not restrained him, I feel sure he would have attacked young Mr. Malfoy as well. I will want their broomsticks confiscated, of course; I shall keep them safely in my office, to make sure there is no infringement of my ban. But I am not unreasonable, Professor McGonagall," she continued, turning back to Professor McGonagall who was now standing as still as though carved from ice, staring at her. "The rest of the team can continue playing, I saw no signs of violence from any of them. Well... good afternoon to you."
"Banned," said Angelina in a hollow voice, late that evening in the common room. "Banned. No
Seeker and no Beaters... what on earth are we going to do?"
"It's just so unfair," said Alicia numbly. "I mean, what about Crabbe and that Bludger he hit after the whistle had been blown? Has she banned him?"
"No," said Ginny miserably; she and Hermione were sitting on either side of Harry. "He just got
lines, I heard Montague laughing about it at dinner."
"And banning Fred when he didn't even do anything!" said Alicia furiously, pummeling her
"It's not my fault I didn't," said Fred, with a very ugly look on his face, "I would've pounded the
little scumbag to a pulp if you three hadn't been holding me back."
"I'm going to bed," said Angelina, getting slowly t o her feet. "Maybe this will all turn out to have been a bad dream... maybe I'll wake up tomorrow and find we haven't played yet..."
"Have you seen Ron?" Hermione asked in a low voice.
"I think he's avoiding us," said Hermione. "Where d o you think he -?"
"Where have you been?" said Hermione anxiously, springing up.
"Walking," Ron mumbled. He was still wearing his Quidditch things.
"You look frozen," said Hermione. "Come and sit down!"
"I'm sorry," Ron mumbled, looking at his feet.
"What for?" said Harry.
"For thinking I can play Quidditch," said Ron. "I'm going to resign first thing tomorrow."
"If you resign," said Harry testily, "there'll only be three players left on the team." And when Ron looked puzzled, he said, "I've been given a lifetime ban. So've Fred and George."
"What?" Ron yelped.
"This is all my fault -"
"You didn't make me punch Malfoy," said Harry angrily.
"- if I wasn't so terrible at Quidditch -"
"- it's got nothing to do with that."
"- it was that song that wound me up -"
"- it would've wound anyone up."
"Look, drop it, will you!" Harry burst out. "It's bad enough, without you blaming yourself for
everything!"
a dull voice, "This is the worst I've ever felt in my life."
"Join the club," said Harry bitterly.
"Well," said Hermione, her voice trembling slightly. "I can think of one thing that might cheer
you both up."
"Oh yeah?" said Harry skeptically.
"Yeah," said Hermione, turning away from the pitch-black, snow-flecked window, a broad smile
spreading across her face. "Hagrids back."
"Well, it's cold out there!" she said defensively, as Ron clicked his tongue impatiently.
"Hagrid, its us!" Harry called through the keyhole.
"Shoulda known!" said a gruff voice.
pleased. "Bin home three seconds... out the way, Fang... out the way, yeh dozy dog..."
"Merlin's beard, keep it down!" said Hagrid hastily, staring wildly over their heads. "Under that
Cloak, are yeh? Well, get in, get in!"
"I'm sorry!" Hermione gasped, as the three of them squeezed past Hagrid into the house and
pulled the Cloak off themselves so he could see them. "I just - oh, Hagrid!"
"It's nuthin', it's nuthin'!" said Hagrid hastily, shutting the door behind them and hurrying to
"What happened to you?" Harry demanded, while Fang danced around them all, trying to lick
"Told yeh, nuthin'," said Hagrid firmly. "Want a cuppa?"
"Come off it," said Ron, "you're in a right state!"
"I'm tellin' yeh, I'm fine," said Hagrid, straightening up and turning to beam at them all, but
wincing. "Blimey, it's good ter see yeh three again - had good summers, did yeh?"
"Hagrid, you've been attacked!" said Ron.
"Fer the las' time, it's nuthin'!" said Hagrid firmly.
"Would you say it was nothing if one of us turned up with a pound of mince instead of a face?"
"You ought to go and see Madam Pomfrey, Hagrid," said Hermione anxiously, "some of those
cuts look nasty."
"I'm dealin' with it, all righ'?" said Hagrid repressively.
"You're not going to eat that, are you, Hagrid?" said Ron, leaning in for a closer look. "It looks
poisonous."
"It's s'posed ter look like that, it's dragon meat," Hagrid said. "An' I didn' get it ter eat."
"Tha's better. It helps with the stingin', yeh know."
"So, are you going to tell us what's happened to you?" Harry asked.
"Can't, Harry. Top secret. More'n me job's worth ter tell yeh that."
"Did the giants beat you up, Hagrid?" asked Hermione quietly.
"Giants?" said Hagrid, catching the steak before it reached his belt and slapping it back over his
face, "who said anythin' abou' giants? Who yeh bin talkin' to? Who's told yeh what I've - who's
said I've bin - eh?"
"We guessed," said Hermione apologetically.
"Oh, yeh did, did yeh?" said Hagrid, surveying her sternly with the eye that was not hidden by
"It was kind of... obvious," said Ron. Harry nodded.
"Never known kids like you three fer knowin' more'n yeh oughta," he muttered, splashing
boiling water into three of his bucket-shaped mugs. "An' I'm not complimentin' yeh, neither.
Nosy, some'd call it. Interferin'."
"So you have been to look for giants?" said Harry, grinning as he sat down at the table.
"Yeah, all righ'," he grunted, "I have."
"And you found them?" said Hermione in a hushed voice.
"Well, they're not that difficult ter find, ter be honest," said Hagrid. "Pretty big, see."
"Where are they?" said Ron.
"Mountains," said Hagrid unhelpfully.
"So why don't Muggles -?"
"They do," said Hagrid darkly. "On'y their deaths are always put down ter mountaineerin'
accidents, aren' they?"
"Come on, Hagrid, tell us what you've been up to!" said Ron. "Tell us about being attacked by the giants and Harry can tell you about being attacked by the Dementors -"
"Whadda yeh mean, attacked by Dementors?" growled Hagrid.
"Didn't you know?" Hermione asked him, wide-eyed.
"I don' know anythin' that's bin happenin' since I left. I was on a secret mission, wasn' I, didn'
wan' owls followin' me all over the place - ruddy Dementors! Yeh're not serious?"
"Yeah, I am, they turned up in Little Whinging and attacked my cousin and me, and then the
Ministry of Magic expelled me -"
"WHAT?"
"- and I had to go to a hearing and everything, but tell us about the giants first."
"You were expelled!"
"Tell us about your summer and I'll tell you about mine."
"Oh, all righ'," Hagrid said in a resigned voice.
"Oh, Hagrid, don't, it's not hygien--" Hermione began, but Hagrid had already slapped the meat
He took another fortifying gulp of tea, then said, "Well, we set off righ' after term ended -"
"Madame Maxime went with you, then?" Hermione interjected.
"Yeah, tha's righ'," said Hagrid, and a softened expression appeared on the few inches of face
that were not obscured by beard or green steak. "Yeah, it was jus' the pair of us. An' I'll tell yeh
sleepin' in caves an' tha', bu' she never complained once."
"You knew where you were going?" Harry repeated. "You knew where the giants were?"
"Well, Dumbledore knew, an' he told us," said Hagrid.
"Are they hidden?" asked Ron. "Is it a secret, where they are?"
"Not really" said Hagrid, shaking his shaggy head. "It's jus' that mos' wizards aren' bothered
there -"
"A month?" said Ron, as though he had never heard o f a journey lasting such a ridiculously long
time. "But - why couldn't you just grab a Portkey or something?"
"We're bein' watched, Ron," he said gruffly.
"What d'you mean?"
"Yeh don' understand," said Hagrid. "The Ministry's keepin' an eye on Dumbledore an' anyone
they reckon's in league with 'im, an' -"
"We know about that," said Harry quickly keen to hear the rest of Hagrid's story, "we know
about the Ministry watching Dumbledore -"
"So you couldn't use magic to get there?" asked Ron, looking thunderstruck, "you had to act like
Muggles all the way?"
"Well, not exactly all the way" said Hagrid cagily. "We jus' had ter be careful, 'cause Olympe an' me, we stick out a bit --"
"- so we're not hard ter follow. We was pretendin' we was goin' on holiday together, so we got
ter give the berk tailin' us the slip round abou' Dee-John --"
"Ooooh, Dijon?" said Hermione excitedly. "I've been there on holiday, did you see -?"
"We chanced a bit o' magic after that an' it wasn' a bad journey. Ran inter a couple o' mad trolls
"An' then we reached the place, an' we started trekkin' up through the mountains, lookin' fer
"We had ter lay off the magic once we got near 'em. Partly 'cause they don' like wizards an' we
nearer in case there was Death Eaters around."
"Go on!" said Harry urgently.
"Found 'em," said Hagrid baldly. "Went over a ridge one nigh' an' there they was, spread ou'
mountain movin'."
"How big are they?" asked Ron in a hushed voice.
"Bout twenty feet," said Hagrid casually. "Some o' the bigger ones mighta bin twenty-five."
"And how many were there?" asked Harry.
"I reckon abou' seventy or eighty," said Hagrid.
"Is that all?" said Hermione.
"Yep," said Hagrid sadly, "eighty left, an' there was loads once, musta bin a hundred diff'rent
stick together fer their own protection."
"So," said Harry, "you saw them and then what?"
"Well, we waited till morning, didn' want ter go sneakin' up on 'em in the dark, fer our own
safety," said Hagrid. "Bout three in the mornin' they fell asleep jus' where they was sittin'. We
"Anyway, once it was light we wen' down ter see 'em."
"Just like that?" said Ron, looking awestruck. "You just walked right into a giant camp?"
"Well, Dumbledore'd told us how ter do it," said Hagrid. "Give the Gurg gifts, show some
respect, yeh know."
"Give the what gifts?" asked Harry.
"Oh, the Gurg - means the chief."
"How could you tell which one was the Gurg?" asked Ron.
"No problem," he said. "He was the biggest, the ugliest an' the laziest. Sittin' there waitin' ter be
brought food by the others. Dead goats an' such like. Name o' Karkus. I'd put him at twenty-two, twenty-three feet an' the weight o' a couple o' bull elephants. Skin like rhino hide an' all."
"And you just walked up to him?" said Hermione breathlessly.
"Well... down ter him, where he was lyin' in the valley. They was in this dip between four pretty
others ter feed him an' his wife. Olympe an' I went down the mountainside -"
"But didn't they try and kill you when they saw you?" asked Ron incredulously.
"It was def'nitely on some o' their minds," said Ha grid, shrugging, "but we did what Dumbledore told us ter do, which was ter hold our gift up high an' keep our eyes on the Gurg an' ignore the others. So tha's what we did. An' the rest of 'em went quiet an' watched us pass an' we got right up ter Karkus's feet an' we bowed an' put our present down in front o' him."
"What do you give a giant?" asked Ron eagerly. "Food?"
"Nah, he can get food all righ' fer himself," said Hagrid. "We took him magic. Giants like magic, jus' don' like us usin' it against 'em. Anyway, that firs' day we gave 'im a branch o' Gubraithian fire."
Hermione said, "Wow!" softly, but Harry and Ron both frowned in puzzlement.
"A branch of -?"
"Everlasting fire," said Hermione irritably, "you ought to know that by now. Professor Flitwick's
mentioned it at least twice in class!"
"Well, anyway," said Hagrid quickly, intervening before Ron could answer back, "Dumbledore'd bewitched this branch to burn fer evermore, which isn' somethin' any wizard could do, an' so I lies it down in the snow by Karkus's feet and says, 'A gift to the Gurg of the giants from Albus Dumbledore, who sends his respectful greetings.'"
"And what did Karkus say?" asked Harry eagerly.
"Nothin'," said Hagrid. "Didn' speak English."
"You're kidding!"
"Didn' matter," said Hagrid imperturbably, "Dumbledore had warned us tha' migh' happen.
Karkus knew enough to yell fer a couple o' giants who knew our lingo an' they translated fer us."
"And did he like the present?" asked Ron.
"Oh yeah, it went down a storm once they understood what it was," said Hagrid, turning his
dragon steak over to press the cooler side to his swollen eye. "Very pleased. So then I said,
gift."
"Why couldn't you speak to them that day?" asked Hermione.
"Dumbledore wanted us ter take it very slow," said Hagrid. "Let 'em see we kept our
mornin' we went back an' this time we found Karkus sittin' up waitin' fer us lookin' all eager."
"And you talked to him?"
"Oh yeah. Firs' we presented him with a nice battle helmet -goblin-made an' indestructible, yeh
know - an' then we sat down an' we talked."
"What did he say?"
"Not much," said Hagrid. "Listened mostly. Bu' there were good signs. He'd heard o'
"Bu' that night it all wen' wrong."
"What d'you mean?" said Ron quickly.
"Well, like I say, they're not meant ter live together, giants," said Hagrid sadly. "Not in big
seein' as how their whole race is abou' finished, they'd lay off each other, bu'..."
"That night a fight broke out, we saw it from the mouth of our cave, lookin' down on the valley.
scarlet an' his head was lyin' at the bottom o' the lake."
"Whose head?" gasped Hermione.
"Karkus's," said Hagrid heavily. "There was a new Gurg, Golgomath." He sighed deeply.
"Well, we hadn' bargained on a new Gurg two days after we'd made friendly contact with the firs' one, an' we had a funny feelin' Golgomath wouldn' be so keen ter listen to us, bu' we had ter try."
"You went to speak to him?" asked Ron incredulously. "After you'd watched him rip off another
giant's head?"
"Course we did," said Hagrid, "we hadn' gone all that way ter give up after two days! We wen'
"I knew it was no go before I'd opened me mouth. He was sitting there wearin' Karkus's helmet,
knew, I was hangin' upside-down in the air by me feet, two of his mates had grabbed me."
"How did you get out of that?" asked Harry.
"Wouldn'ta done if Olympe hadn' bin there," said Hagrid. "She pulled out her wand an' did some o' the fastes' spellwork I've ever seen. Ruddy marvellous. Hit the two holdin' me right in the eyes with Conjunctivitus Curses an' they dropped me straightaway - bu' we were in trouble then, 'cause we'd used magic against 'em, an' that's what giants hate abou' wizards. We had ter leg it an' we knew there was no way we was going ter be able ter march inter the camp again."
"Blimey, Hagrid," said Ron quietly.
"So, how come it's taken you so long to get home if you were only there for three days?" asked
"We didn' leave after three days!" said Hagrid, looking outraged. "Dumbledore was relyin' on
us!"
"But you've just said there was no way you could go back!"
"Not by daylight we couldn', no. We just had ter rethink a bit. Spent a couple o' days lyin' low
up in the cave an' watchin'. An' wha' we saw wasn' good."
"Did he rip off more heads?" asked Hermione, sounding squeamish.
"No," said Hagrid, "I wish he had."
"What d'you mean?"
"I mean we soon found out he didn' object ter all wizards - just us."
"Death Eaters?" said Harry quickly.
"Yep," said Hagrid darkly. "Couple of 'em were visitin' him ev'ry day, bringin' gifts ter the
Gurg, an' he wasn' dangling them upside-down."
"How d'you know they were Death Eaters?" said Ron.
"Because I recognized one of 'em," Hagrid growled. "Macnair, remember him? Bloke they sent
gettin' on so well."
"So Macnairs persuaded the giants to join You-Know-Who?" said Hermione desperately.
"Hold yer Hippogriffs, I haven' finished me story yet!" said Hagrid indignantly, who, considering he had not wanted to tell them anything in the first place, now seemed to be rather enjoying himself. "Me an' Olympe talked it over an' we agreed, jus' 'cause the Gurg looked like favorin' You-Know-Who didn' mean all of 'em would. We had ter try an' persuade some o' the others, the ones who hadn' wanted Golgomath as Gurg."
"How could you tell which ones they were?" asked Ron.
"Well, they were the ones bein' beaten to a pulp, weren' they?" said Hagrid patiently. "The ones
a few o' them."
"You went poking around dark caves looking for giants?" said Ron, with awed respect in his
"Well, it wasn' the giants who worried us most," said Hagrid. "We were more concerned abou'
Olympe jumpin' out at 'em," said Hagrid, the corners of his mouth lifting his wild beard, "she
'spect it's the French in her..."
"So, what happened? Did you ever get near any of the other giants?"
"What? Oh... oh, yeah, we did. Yeah, on the third night after Karkus was killed we crept outta
three giants hidin'."
"Cave must've been cramped," said Ron.
"Wasn' room ter swing a Kneazle," said Hagrid.
"Didn't they attack you when they saw you?" asked Hermione.
"Probably woulda done if they'd bin in any condition," said Hagrid, "but they was badly hurt, all
visitin' the wounded... I reckon we had abou' six or seven o' them convinced at one poin'."
"Six or seven?" said Ron eagerly. "Well that's not bad - are they going to come over here and
start fighting You-Know-Who with us?"
But Hermione said, "What do you mean 'one point', Hagrid?"
"Golgomath's lot raided the caves. The ones tha' survived didn' wan' no more ter to do with us
after that."
"So... so there aren't any giants coming?" said Ron, looking disappointed.
"Nope," said Hagrid, heaving a deep sigh as he turned over his steak and applied the cooler side
to his face, "but we did wha' we meant ter do, we g ave 'em Dumbledore's message an' some o'
Dumbledore's friendly to 'em... could be they'll come."
"Hagrid?" said Hermione quietly after a while.
"Mmm?"
"Did you... was there any sign of... did you hear anything about your... your... mother while
you were there?"
"I'm sorry... I... forget it -"
"Dead," Hagrid grunted. "Died years ago. They told me."
"Oh... I'm... I'm really sorry" said Hermione in a very small voice. Hagrid shrugged his massive shoulders.
"No need," he said shortly. "Can't remember her much. Wasn' a great mother."
"But you still haven't explained how you got in this state, Hagrid," Ron said, gesturing towards
"Or why you're back so late," said Harry. "Sirius says Madame Maxime got back ages ago -"
"Who attacked you?" said Ron.
"I haven' bin attacked!" said Hagrid emphatically. "I -"
"It's her!" Ron whispered.
"Get under here!" Harry said quickly; seizing the Invisibility Cloak, he whirled it over himself
"Hagrid, hide our mugs!"
"So," she said slowly and loudly, as though speaking to somebody deaf. "You're Hagrid, are
you?"
"Get away," she snapped, waving her handbag at Fang, who had bounded up to her and was
"Er - I don' want ter be rude," said Hagrid, staring at her, "but who the ruddy hell are you?"
"My name is Dolores Umbridge."
"Dolores Umbridge?" Hagrid said, sounding thoroughly confused. "I thought you were one o'
them Ministry - don' you work with Fudge?"
"I was Senior Undersecretary to the Minister, yes," said Umbridge, now pacing around the cabin,
cloak. "I am now the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher -"
"Tha's brave of yeh," said Hagrid, "there's not many'd take tha' job any more."
"- and Hogwarts High Inquisitor," said Umbridge, giving no sign that she had heard him.
"Wha's that?" said Hagrid, frowning.
"Precisely what I was going to ask," said Umbridge, pointing at the broken shards of china on the floor that had been Hermione's mug.
"Oh," said Hagrid, with a most unhelpful glance towards the corner where Harry, Ron and
Hermione stood hidden, "oh, tha' was... was Fang. He broke a mug. So I had ter use this one
instead."
"I heard voices," she said quietly.
"I was talkin' ter Fang," said Hagrid stoutly.
"And was he talking back to you?"
"Well... in a manner o' speakin'," said Hagrid, looking uncomfortable. "I sometimes say Fang's
near enough human -"
"There are three sets of footprints in the snow leading from the castle doors to your cabin," said
"Well, I on'y jus' got back," said Hagrid, waving an enormous hand at the haversack. "Maybe
someone came ter call earlier an' I missed 'em."
"There are no footsteps leading away from your cabin door."
"Well, I... I don' know why that'd be..." said Hagrid, tugging nervously at his beard and again
"Erm..."
cooking, she wheeled round again and said, "What has happened to you? How did you sustain
those injuries?"
the large amount of fresh and congealed blood on his face. "Oh, I... had a bit of an accident," he
"What sort of accident?"
"I - I tripped."
"You tripped," she repeated coolly.
"Yeah, tha's right. Over... over a friend's broomstick. I don' fly, meself. Well, look at the size o'
them an' it was -"
"Where have you been?" asked Umbridge, cutting coolly through Hagrid's babbling.
"Where've I -?"
"Been, yes," she said. "Term started two months ago. Another teacher has had to cover your
whereabouts. You left no address. Where have you been?"
"I - I've been away for me health," he said.
"For your health," repeated Professor Umbridge. Her eyes traveled over Hagrid's discolored
and swollen face; dragon blood dripped gently and silently on to his waistcoat. "I see."
"Yeah," said Hagrid, "bit o' - o' fresh air, yeh know -"
"Yes, as gamekeeper fresh air must be so difficult to come by," said Umbridge sweetly. The
"Well -- change o' scene, yeh know -"
"Mountain scenery?" said Umbridge swiftly.
"Mountains?" Hagrid repeated, clearly thinking fast. "Nope, South o' France fer me. Bit o' sun
an'... an' sea."
"Really?" said Umbridge. "You don't have much of a tan."
"Yeah... well... sensitive skin," said Hagrid, attempting an ingratiating smile. Harry noticed that
she hoisted her handbag a little higher into the crook of her arm and said, "I shall, of course, be
informing the Minister of your late return."
"Righ'," said Hagrid, nodding.
"You ought to know, too, that as High Inquisitor it is my unfortunate but necessary duty to
inspect my fellow teachers. So I daresay we shall meet again soon enough."
"You're inspectin' us?" Hagrid repeated blankly, looking after her.
"Oh, yes," said Umbridge softly, looking back at him with her hand on the door handle. "The
Ministry is determined to weed out unsatisfactory teachers, Hagrid. Goodnight."
"Not yet," she breathed in his ear. "She might not be gone yet."
"She's goin' back ter the castle," he said in a low voice. "Blimey... inspectin' people, is she?"
"Yeah," said Harry, pulling off the Cloak. "Trelawney's on probation already..."
"Um... what sort of thing are you planning to do with us in class, Hagrid?" asked Hermione.
"Oh, don' you worry abou' that, I've got a great load o' lessons planned," said Hagrid
"I've bin keepin' a couple o' creatures saved fer yer OWL year; you wait, they're somethin'
really special."
"Erm... special in what way?" asked Hermione tentatively.
"I'm not sayin'," said Hagrid happily. "I don' wan t ter spoil the surprise."
"Look, Hagrid," said Hermione urgently, dropping all pretence, "Professor Umbridge won't be at all happy if you bring anything to class that's too dangerous."
"Dangerous?" said Hagrid, looking genially bemused. "Don' be silly, I wouldn' give yeh anythin' dangerous! I mean, all righ', they can look after themselves -"
"Hagrid, you've got to pass Umbridge's inspection, and to do that it would really be better if she
hedgehogs, stuff like that!" said Hermione earnestly.
"But tha's not very interestin', Hermione," said Hagrid. "The stuff I've got's much more
Britain."
"Hagrid... please..." said Hermione, a note of real desperation in her voice. "Umbridge is looking for any excuse to get rid of teachers she thinks are too close to Dumbledore. Please, Hagrid, teach us something dull that's bound to come up in our OWL."
"Lis'en, it's bin a long day an' it's late," he said, patting Hermione gently on the shoulder, so that her knees gave way and hit the floor with a thud. "Oh - sorry -" He pulled her back up by the
neck of her robes. "Look, don' you go worryin' abou' me, I promise yeh I've got really good
don' forget ter wipe yer footprints out behind yeh!"
"I dunno if you got through to him," said Ron a sho rt while later when, having checked that the
"Then I'll go back again tomorrow," said Hermione determinedly. "I'll plan his lessons for him if I have to. I don't care if she throws out Trelawney but she's not getting rid of Hagrid!"
"Oy!" bellowed Ron, finally losing patience and sticking his head out of the window, "I am a
prefect and if one more snowball hits this window - OUCH!"
"It's Fred and George," he said bitterly, slamming the window behind him. "Gits..."
"So?" said Ron, looking up when she entered. "Got all his lessons planned for him?"
"Well, I tried," she said dully, sinking into a chair beside Harry. She pulled out her wand and
her robes, which began to steam as they dried out. "He wasn't even there when I arrived, I was
knocking for at least half an hour. And then he came stumping out of the Forest -"
Hagrid the sack. "What's he keeping in there? Did he say?" he asked.
"No," said Hermione miserably. "He says he wants them to be a surprise. I tried to explain about
study Knarls than Chimaeras - oh, I don't think he's got a Chimaera," she added at the appalled
look on Harry and Ron's faces, "but that's not for lack of trying, from what he said about how
funny mood, you know. He still won't say how he got all those injuries."
"We're workin' in here today!" Hagrid called happily to the approaching students, jerking his
head back at the dark trees behind him. "Bit more sheltered! Anyway, they prefer the dark."
"What prefers the dark?" Harry heard Malfoy say sharply to Crabbe and Goyle, a trace of panic
in his voice. "What did he say prefers the dark - did you hear?"
"Ready?" said Hagrid cheerfully, looking around at the class. "Right, well, I've bin savin' a trip
who's managed ter train 'em."
"And you're sure they're trained, are you?" said Malfoy, the panic in his voice even more
pronounced. "Only it wouldn't be the first time you'd brought wild stuff to class, would it?"
"Course they're trained," said Hagrid, scowling and hoisting the dead cow a little higher on his
"So what happened to your face, then?" demanded Malfoy.
"Mind yer own business!" said Hagrid, angrily. "Now, if yeh've finished askin' stupid questions,
follow me!"
"Gather roun', gather roun'," Hagrid encouraged. "Now, they'll be attracted by the smell o' the
meat but I'm goin' ter give 'em a call anyway, 'cause they'll like ter know it's me."
was still staring around into the trees and after a few seconds he whispered, "Why doesn't Hagrid call again?"
"Oh, an' here comes another one!" said Hagrid proudly, as a second black horse appeared out of
meat. "Now... put yer hands up, who can see 'em?"
"Yeah... yeah, I knew you'd be able ter, Harry," he said seriously. "An' you too, Neville, eh? An' -"
"Excuse me," said Malfoy in a sneering voice, "but what exactly are we supposed to be seeing?"
"What's doing it?" Parvati demanded in a terrified voice, retreating behind the nearest tree.
"What's eating it?"
"Thestrals," said Hagrid proudly and Hermione gave a soft "Oh!" of comprehension at Harry's
shoulder. "Hogwarts has got a whole herd of 'em in here. Now, who knows -?"
"But they're really, really unlucky!" interrupted Parvati, looking alarmed. "They're supposed to
-"
"No, no, no," said Hagrid, chuckling, "tha's jus' superstition, that is, they aren' unlucky, they're
another couple, look -"
shivered and pressed herself closer to the tree, saying, "I think I felt something, I think it's near
me!"
"Don' worry, it won' hurt yen," said Hagrid patiently. "Righ', now, who can tell me why some o' yeh can see 'em an' some can't?"
"Go on then," said Hagrid, beaming at her.
"The only people who can see Thestrals," she said, "are people who have seen death."
"Tha's exactly right," said Hagrid solemnly, "ten points ter Gryffindor. Now, Thestrals -"
"Hem, hem."
"Hem, hem."
"Oh, hello!" Hagrid said, smiling, having located the source of the noise.
"You received the note I sent to your cabin this morning?" said Umbridge, in the same loud, slow voice she had used with him earlier, as though she were addressing somebody both foreign and very slow. "Telling you that I would be inspecting y our lesson?"
"Oh, yeah," said Hagrid brightly. "Glad yeh found the place all righ'! Well, as you can see - or, I
dunno - can you? We're doin' Thestrals today -"
"I'm sorry?" said Professor Umbridge loudly, cupping her hand around her ear and frowning.
"What did you say?"
"Er - Thestrals!" he said loudly. "Big - er - winged horses, yeh know!"
muttered as she made a note on her clipboard: "Has... to... resort... to... crude...
sign... language."
"Well... anyway..." said Hagrid, turning back to the class and looking slightly flustered, "erm...
what was I sayin'?"
"Appears... to... have... poor... short... term... memory," muttered Umbridge, loudly enough
"Oh, yeah," said Hagrid, throwing an uneasy glance at Umbridge's clipboard, but ploughing on
valiantly. "Yeah, I was gonna tell yeh how come we got a herd. Yeah, so, we started off with a
male an' five females. This one," he patted the fir st horse to have appeared, "name o' Tenebrus,
he's my special favorite, firs' one born here in the Forest -"
"Are you aware," Umbridge said loudly, interrupting him, "that the Ministry of Magic has
classified Thestrals as 'dangerous'?"
"Thestrals aren' dangerous! All righ', they might take a bite outta yeh if yeh really annoy them -"
"Shows... signs... of... pleasure... at... idea... of... violence," muttered Umbridge, scribbling
"No - come on!" said Hagrid, looking a little anxious now. "I mean, a dog'll bite if yeh bait it,
think they were bad omens, didn' they? Jus' didn' understand, did they?"
again very loudly and slowly, "Please continue teaching as usual. I am going to walk," she
mimed walking (Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson were having silent fits of laughter) "among the
students" (she pointed around at individual members of the class) "and ask them questions." She
"You hag, you evil hag!" she whispered, as Umbridge walked towards Pansy Parkinson. "I know
what you're doing, you awful, twisted, vicious -"
"Erm... anyway," said Hagrid, clearly struggling to regain the flow of his lesson, "so - Thestrals.
Yeah. Well, there's loads o' good stuff abou' them..."
"Do you find," said Professor Umbridge in a ringing voice to Pansy Parkinson, "that you are able
to understand Professor Hagrid when he talks?"
"No... because... well... it sounds... like grunting a lot of the time."
"Er... yeah... good stuff abou' Thestrals. Well, once they're tamed, like this lot, yeh'll never be
lost again. 'Mazin' sense o' direction, jus' tell 'em where yeh want ter go -"
"Assuming they can understand you, of course," said Malfoy loudly, and Pansy Parkinson
"You can see the Thestrals, Longbottom, can you?" she said.
"Who did you see die?" she asked, her tone indifferent.
"My... my grandad," said Neville.
"And what do you think of them?" she said, waving her stubby hand at the horses, who by now
"Erm," said Neville nervously, with a glance at Hagrid. "Well, they're... er... okay..."
"Students... are... too... intimidated... to... admit... they... are... frightened," muttered
"No!" said Neville, looking upset. "No, I'm not scared of them!"
"It's quite all right," said Umbridge, patting Neville on the shoulder with what she evidently
intended to be an understanding smile, though it looked more like a leer to Harry. "Well, Hagrid," she turned to look up at him again, speaking once more in that loud, slow voice, "I think I've got enough to be getting along with. You will receive" (she mimed taking something from the air in front of her) "the results of your inspection" (she pointed at the clipboard) "in ten days' time." She held up ten stubby little fingers, then, her smile wider and more toadlike than ever before beneath her green hat, she bustled from their midst, leaving Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson in fits of laughter, Hermione actually shaking with fury and Neville looking confused and upset.
"That foul, lying, twisting old gargoyle!" stormed Hermione half an hour later, as they made their way back up to the castle through the channels they had made earlier in the snow. "You see what she's up to? It's her thing about half-breeds all over again - she's trying to make out Hagrid's some kind of dimwitted troll, just because he had a giantess for a mother - and oh, it's not fair, that really wasn't a bad lesson at all - I mean, all right, if it had been Blast-Ended Skrewts again, but Thestrals are fine - in fact, for Hagrid, they're really good!"
"Umbridge said they're dangerous," said Ron.
"Well, it's like Hagrid said, they can look after themselves," said Hermione impatiently, "and I
wish I could."
"Do you?" Harry asked her quietly.
"Oh, Harry - I'm sorry - no, of course I don't - that was a really stupid thing to say."
"It's okay," he said quickly, "don't worry"
"I'm surprised so many people could see them," said Ron. "Three in a class -"
"Yeah, Weasley, we were just wondering," said a malicious voice. Unheard by any of them in the muffling snow, Malfoy, Crabbe and Goyle were walking along right behind them. "D'you reckon if you saw someone snuff it you'd be able to see the Quaffle better?"
broke into a chorus of "Weasley is our King". Ron's ears turned scarlet.
"Ignore them, just ignore them," intoned Hermione, pulling out her wand and performing the
approached. They were called upon to supervise the decoration of the castle ("You try putting up
tinsel when Peeves has got the other end and is trying to strangle you with it," said Ron), to
("And they're cheeky little snot-rags, you know, we definitely weren't that rude when we were in first year," said Ron) and to patrol the corridors in shifts with Argus Filch, who suspected that the holiday spirit might show itself in an outbreak of wizard duels ("He's got dung for brains, that one," said Ron furiously). They were so busy that Hermione had even stopped knitting elf hats and was fretting that she was down to her last three.
"All those poor elves I haven't set free yet, having to stay here over Christmas because there
aren't enough hats!"
Harry asking him how he was going to get home for Christmas: "But you're coming too! Didn't I say? Mum wrote and told me to invite you weeks ago!"
"Hello," she said vaguely, looking around at what remained of the decorations. "These are nice,
did you put them up?"
"No," said Harry, "it was Dobby the house-elf."
"Mistletoe," said Luna dreamily, pointing at a large clump of white berries placed almost over
Harry's head. He jumped out from under it. "Good thinking," said Luna very seriously. "It's often infested with Nargles."
"Well," said Angelina dully, pulling off her cloak and throwing it into a corner, "we've finally
replaced you."
"Replaced me?" said Harry blankly.
"You and Fred and George," she said impatiently. "We've got another Seeker!"
"Who?" said Harry quickly.
"Ginny Weasley," said Katie.
"Yeah, I know," said Angelina, pulling out her wand and flexing her arm, "but she's pretty good,
actually. Nothing on you, of course," she said, throwing him a very dirty look, "but as we can't
have you..."
"And what about the Beaters?" he asked, trying to keep his voice even.
"Andrew Kirke," said Alicia without enthusiasm, "and Jack Sloper. Neither of them are brilliant,
but compared to the rest of the idiots who turned up..."
"Okay," he said, calling them all to order. "I thought this evening we should just go over the things we've done so far, because it's the last meeting before the holidays and there's no point starting anything new right before a three-week break -"
"We're not doing anything new?" said Zacharias Smith, in a disgruntled whisper loud enough to
carry through the room. "If I'd known that, I wouldn't have come."
"We're all really sorry Harry didn't tell you, then," said Fred loudly.
"- we can practice in pairs," said Harry. "We'll start with the Impediment Jinx, for ten minutes,
then we can get out the cushions and try Stunning again."
intermittent cries of "Impedimenta!" People froze f or a minute or so, during which their partner
"You're getting really good," he said, beaming around at them. "When we get back from the
holidays we can start doing some of the big stuff - maybe even Patronuses."
people wished Harry a "Happy Christmas" as they went. Feeling cheerful, he collected up the
he did; he hung back a little, because Cho was still there and he was hoping to receive a "Merry
Christmas" from her.
"No, you go on," he heard her say to her friend Marietta and his heart gave a jolt that seemed to
"Wha--?"
"What's up?" he said, feebly.
"I'm - sorry," she said thickly. "I suppose... it's just... learning all this stuff... it just makes me... wonder whether... if he'd known it all... he'd still be alive."
"He did know this stuff," Harry said heavily. "He was really good at it, or he could never have got to the middle of that maze. But if Voldemort really wants to kill you, you don't stand a chance."
"You survived when you were just a baby," she said quietly.
"Yeah, well," said Harry wearily, moving towards the door, "I dunno why nor does anyone else,
so it's nothing to be proud of."
"Oh, don't go!" said Cho, sounding tearful again. "I'm really sorry to get all upset like this... I
didn't mean to..."
thoroughly miserable. He'd have been so pleased with just a "Merry Christmas".
"I know it must be horrible for you," she said, mop ping her eyes on her sleeve again. "Me
mentioning Cedric, when you saw him die... I suppose you just want to forget about it?"
"You're a r-really good teacher, you know," said Cho, with a watery smile. "I've never been able
to Stun anything before."
"Thanks," said Harry awkwardly.
"Mistletoe," said Cho quietly, pointing at the ceiling over his head.
"Yeah," said Harry. His mouth was very dry. "It's probably full of Nargles, though."
"What are Nargles?"
"No idea," said Harry. She had moved closer. His brain seemed to have been Stunned. "You'd
have to ask Loony. Luna, I mean."
"I really like you, Harry."
"What kept you?" he asked, as Harry sank into the armchair next to Hermione's.
"Are you all right, Harry?" Hermione asked, peering at him over the tip of her quill.
"What's up?" said Ron, hoisting himself up on his elbow to get a clearer view of Harry. "What's
happened?"
"Is it Cho?" she asked in a businesslike way. "Did she corner you after the meeting?"
"So - er - what did she want?" he asked in a mock casual voice.
"She -" Harry began, rather hoarsely; he cleared his throat and tried again. "She - er -"
"Did you kiss?" asked Hermione briskly.
"Well?" he demanded.
"HA!"
"Well?" Ron said finally, looking up at Harry. "How was it?"
"Wet," he said truthfully.
"Because she was crying," Harry continued heavily.
"Oh," said Ron, his smile fading slightly. "Are you that bad at kissing?"
"Dunno," said Harry, who hadn't considered this, and immediately felt rather worried. "Maybe I
am."
"Of course you're not," said Hermione absently, still scribbling away at her letter.
"How do you know?" said Ron very sharply.
"Because Cho spends half her time crying these days," said Hermione vaguely. "She does it at
mealtimes, in the loos, all over the place."
"You'd think a bit of kissing would cheer her up," said Ron, grinning.
"Ron," said Hermione in a dignified voice, dipping the point of her quill into her inkpot, "you are
the most insensitive wart I have ever had the misfortune to meet."
"What's that supposed to mean?" said Ron indignantly. "What sort of person cries while
someone's kissing them?"
"Yeah," said Harry, slightly desperately, "who does?"
"Don't you understand how Cho's feeling at the moment?" she asked.
"No," said Harry and Ron together.
"Well, obviously, she's feeling very sad, because of Cedric dying. Then I expect she's feeling
because she's been flying so badly."
A slightly stunned silence greeted the end of this speech, then Ron said, "One person can't feel
all that at once, they'd explode."
"Just because you've got the emotional range of a teaspoon doesn't mean we all have," said
"She was the one who started it," said Harry. "I wouldn't've - she just sort of came at me - and
next thing she's crying all over me - I didn't know what to do --"
"Don't blame you, mate," said Ron, looking alarmed at the very thought.
"You just had to be nice to her," said Hermione, looking up anxiously. "You were, weren't you?"
"Well," said Harry, an unpleasant heat creeping up his face, "I sort of - patted her on the back a
bit."
"Well, I suppose it could have been worse," she said. "Are you going to see her again?"
"I'll have to, won't I?" said Harry. "We've got D.A. meetings, haven't we?"
"You know what I mean," said Hermione impatiently.
"Oh well," said Hermione distantly, buried in her letter once more, "you'll have plenty of
opportunities to ask her."
"What if he doesn't want to ask her?" said Ron, who had been watching Harry with an unusually
"Don't be silly," said Hermione vaguely, "Harry's liked her for ages, haven't you, Harry?"
"Who're you writing the novel to, anyway?" Ron asked Hermione, trying to read the bit of
"Viktor."
"Krum?"
"How many other Viktors do we know?"
"Well, night," said Hermione, yawning widely as she set off up the girls' staircase.
"What does she see in Krum?" Ron demanded, as he and Harry climbed the boys' stairs.
"Well," said Harry, considering the matter, "I s'pose he's older, isn't he... and he's an
international Quidditch player..."
"Yeah, but apart from that," said Ron, sounding aggravated. "I mean, he's a grouchy git, isn't
he?"
"Bit grouchy, yeah," said Harry, whose thoughts were still on Cho.
"Night," grunted Ron, from somewhere to his right.
"Night," said Harry.
showed up. Harry protested... Cho shouted, "Cedric gave me loads of Chocolate Frog Cards,
look!" And she pulled out fistfuls of Cards from in side her robes and threw them into the air.
Then she turned into Hermione, who said, "You did promise her, you know, Harry... I think
you'd better give her something else instead... how about your Firebolt?" And Harry was
"Harry! HARRY!"
"Harry!"
"He's really ill," said a scared voice. "Should we call someone?"
"Harry!Harry!"
"Your dad," he panted, his chest heaving. "Your dad's... been attacked..."
"What?" said Ron uncomprehendingly.
"Your dad! He's been bitten, it's serious, there was blood everywhere..."
"I'm going for help," said the same scared voice, and Harry heard footsteps running out of the
"Harry, mate," said Ron uncertainly, "you... you were just dreaming..."
"No!" said Harry furiously; it was crucial that Ron understand. "It wasn't a dream... not an ordinary dream... I was there, I saw it... I did it..."
"Harry, you're not well," he said shakily. "Neville's gone for help."
"I'm fine!" Harry choked, wiping his mouth on his p yjamas and shaking uncontrollably.
"There's nothing wrong with me, it's your dad you've got to worry about - we need to find out where he is - he's bleeding like mad - I was - it was a huge snake."
"Over here, Professor."
"What is it, Potter? Where does it hurt?"
"It's Ron's dad," he said, sitting up again. "He's been attacked by a snake and it's serious, I saw it happen."
"What do you mean, you saw it happen?" said Professor McGonagall, her dark eyebrows
"I don't know... I was asleep and then I was there..."
"You mean you dreamed this?"
"No!" said Harry angrily; would none of them understand? "I was having a dream at first about
there was a load of blood, he collapsed, someone's got to find out where he is..."
"I'm not lying and I'm not mad!" Harry told her, his voice rising to a shout. "I tell you, I saw it
happen!"
"I believe you, Potter," said Professor McGonagall curtly. "Put on your dressing gown - we're
going to see the Headmaster."
"Weasley, you ought to come too," said Professor McGonagall.
faintly, but Professor McGonagall said, "Shoo!" Mrs Norris slunk away into the shadows, and in
"Fizzing Whizzbee," said Professor McGonagall.
"Oh, it's you, Professor McGonagall... and... ah."
"Professor Dumbledore, Potter has had a... well, a nightmare," said Professor McGonagall. "He
says..."
"It wasn't a nightmare," said Harry quickly.
"Very well, then, Potter, you tell the Headmaster about it."
"I... well, I was asleep..." said Harry and, even in his terror and his desperation to make
examining his own interlocked fingers. "But it wasn't an ordinary dream... it was real... I saw it
happen..." He took a deep breath, "Ron's dad - Mr. Weasley - has been attacked by a giant
snake."
"How did you see this?" Dumbledore asked quietly, still not looking at Harry.
"Well... I don't know," said Harry, rather angrily - what did it matter? "Inside my head, I suppose -"
"You misunderstand me," said Dumbledore, still in the same calm tone. "I mean... can you
perhaps standing beside the victim, or else looking down on the scene from above?"
"I was the snake," he said. "I saw it all from the snake's point of view."
Nobody else spoke for a moment, then Dumbledore, now looking at Ron who was still wheyfaced, asked in a new and sharper voice, "Is Arthur seriously injured?"
"Yes," said Harry emphatically - why were they all so slow on the uptake, did they not realize
hanging very near the ceiling. "Everard?" he said sharply. "And you too, Dilys!"
"You were listening?" said Dumbledore.
The wizard nodded; the witch said, "Naturally."
"The man has red hair and glasses," said Dumbledore. "Everard, you will need to raise the alarm, make sure he is found by the right people -"
"Everard and Dilys were two of Hogwarts's most celebrated Heads," Dumbledore said, now
bird on his perch beside the door. "Their renown is such that both have portraits hanging in other
tell us what may be happening elsewhere..."
"But Mr. Weasley could be anywhere!" said Harry.
"Please sit down, all three of you," said Dumbledore, as though Harry had not spoken, "Everard
extra chairs."
"We will need," Dumbledore said very quietly to the bird, "a warning."
"Naturally, naturally," murmured Dumbledore apparently to himself, still observing the stream of smoke without the slightest sign of surprise. "But in essence divided?"
"Dumbledore!"
"What news?" said Dumbledore at once.
"I yelled until someone came running," said the wizard, who was mopping his brow on the
curtain behind him, "said I'd heard something moving downstairs - they weren't sure whether to
ran along to Elfrida Cragg's portrait to get a good view as they left -"
"Good," said Dumbledore as Ron made a convulsive movement. "I take it Dilys will have seen
him arrive, then -"
coughing, into her armchair and said, "Yes, they've taken him to St. Mungo's, Dumbledore...
they carried him past my portrait... he looks bad..."
"Thank you," said Dumbledore. He looked round at Professor McGonagall.
"Minerva, I need you to go and wake the other Weasley children."
"Of course..."
"And Dumbledore - what about Molly?" said Professor McGonagall, pausing at the door.
"That will be a job for Fawkes when he has finished keeping a lookout for anybody approaching,"
said Dumbledore. "But she may already know... that excellent clock of hers..."
murmured, "Portus!" For a moment the kettle trembled, glowing with an odd blue light; then it
"Phineas. Phineas."
"Phineas! Phineas! PHINEAS!"
"Did someone call?"
"I need you to visit your other portrait again, Phineas," said Dumbledore. "I've got another
message."
"Visit my other portrait?" said Phineas in a reedy voice, giving a long, fake yawn (his eyes
traveling around the room and focusing on Harry). "Oh, no, Dumbledore, I am too tired tonight."
"Insubordination, sir!" roared a corpulent, red-nosed wizard, brandishing his fists. "Dereliction of duty!"
"We are honor-bound to give service to the present Headmaster of Hogwarts!" cried a fraillooking old wizard whom Harry recognized as Dumbledore's predecessor, Armando Dippet.
"Shame on you, Phineas!"
"Shall I persuade him, Dumbledore?" called a gimlet-eyed witch, raising an unusually thick wand that looked not unlike a birch rod.
"Oh, very well," said the wizard called Phineas, eyeing the wand with mild apprehension,
"though he may well have destroyed my picture by now, he's done away with most of the family
-"
"Sirius knows not to destroy your portrait," said Dumbledore, and Harry realized immediately
bedroom in Grimmauld Place. "You are to give him the message that Arthur Weasley has been
Do you understand?"
"Arthur Weasley, injured, wife and children and Harry Potter coming to stay," repeated Phineas
in a bored voice. "Yes, yes... very well."
"Harry - what's going on?" asked Ginny, who looked frightened. "Professor McGonagall says
you saw Dad get hurt -"
"Your father has been injured in the course of his work for the Order of the Phoenix," said
Dumbledore, before Harry could speak. "He has been taken to St. Mungo's Hospital for Magical
for the hospital than The Burrow. You will meet your mother there."
"How're we going?" asked Fred, looking shaken. "Floo powder?"
"No," said Dumbledore, "Floo powder is not safe at the moment, the Network is being watched.
You will be taking a Portkey." He indicated the old kettle lying innocently on his desk. "We are
sending you -"
"It is Fawkes's warning," said Dumbledore, catching the feather as it fell. "Professor Umbridge
must know you're out of your beds... Minerva, go and head her off - tell her any story -"
"He says he'll be delighted," said a bored voice behind Dumbledore; the wizard called Phineas
had reappeared in front of his Slytherin banner. "My great-great-grandson has always had an odd
taste in house-guests."
"Come here, then," Dumbledore said to Harry and the Weasleys. "And quickly, before anyone
else joins us."
"You have all used a Portkey before?" asked Dumbledore, and they nodded, each reaching out to
touch some part of the blackened kettle. "Good. On the count of three, then... one... two..."
It happened in a fraction of a second: in the infinitesimal pause before Dumbledore said "three",
"... three."
"Back again, the blood-traitor brats. Is it true their father's dying?"
"OUT!" roared a second voice.
"What's going on?" he said, stretching out a hand to help Ginny up. "Phineas Nigellus said
Arthur's been badly injured --"
"Ask Harry," said Fred.
"Yeah, I want to hear this for myself," said George.
"It was -" Harry began; this was even worse than telling McGonagall and Dumbledore. "I had a - a kind of - vision."
"Is Mum here?" said Fred, turning to Sirius.
"She probably doesn't even know what's happened yet," said Sirius. "The important thing was to
get you away before Umbridge could interfere. I expect Dumbledores letting Molly know now."
"We've got to go to St. Mungo's," said Ginny urgently. She looked around at her brothers; they
were of course still in their pajamass. "Sirius, can you lend us cloaks or anything?"
"Hang on, you can't go tearing off to St. Mungo's!" said Sirius.
"Course we can go to St. Mungo's if we want," said Fred, with a mulish expression. "He's our
dad!"
"And how are you going to explain how you knew Arthur was attacked before the hospital even
let his wife know?"
"What does that matter?" said George hotly.
"It matters because we don't want to draw attention to the fact that Harry is having visions of
things that are happening hundreds of miles away!" said Sirius angrily. "Have you any idea what
the Ministry would make of that information?"
Ginny said, "Somebody else could have told us... we could have heard it somewhere other than
Harry."
"Like who?" said Sirius impatiently. "Listen, your dad's been hurt while on duty for the Order
happened, you could seriously damage the Order's -"
"We don't care about the dumb Order!" shouted Fred.
"It's our dad dying we're talking about!" yelled George.
"Your father knew what he was getting into and he won't thank you for messing things up for the
Order!" said Sirius, equally angry. "This is how it is - this is why you're not in the Order - you
don't understand - there are things worth dying for!"
"Easy for you to say, stuck here!" bellowed Fred. "I don't see you risking your neck!"
"I know it's hard, but we've all got to act as though we don't know anything yet. We've got to
stay put, at least until we hear from your mother, all right?"
"That's right," said Sirius encouragingly, "come on, let's all... let's all have a drink while we're
waiting. Accio Butterbeer!"
"Fawkes!" said Sirius at once, snatching up the parchment. "That's not Dumbledore's writing - it
must be a message from your mother - here -"
He thrust the letter into George's hand, who ripped it open and read aloud: "Dad is still alive. I
am setting out for St. Mungo's now. Stay where you are. I will send news as soon as I can. Mum."
"Still alive..." he said slowly. "But that makes it sound..."
"He's going to be all right," she said, her voice weak with tiredness. "He's sleeping. We can all
go and see him later. Bill's sitting with him now; he's going to take the morning off work."
"Breakfast!" said Sirius loudly and joyfully, jumping to his feet. "Where's that accursed house-elf? Kreacher! KREACHER!"
"Oh, forget it, then," muttered Sirius, counting the people in front of him. "So, it's breakfast for -
let's see - seven... bacon and eggs, I think, and some tea, and toast -"
"I don't know what would have happened if it hadn't been for you, Harry," she said in a muffled
voice. "They might not have found Arthur for hours, and then it would have been too late, but
Sturgis..."
"Oh, Sirius, I'm so grateful... they think he'll be there a little while and it would be wonderful to
be nearer... of course, that might mean we're here for Christmas."
"The more the merrier!" said Sirius with such obvious sincerity that Mrs. Weasley beamed at him, threw on an apron and began to help with breakfast.
"Sirius," Harry muttered, unable to stand it a moment longer. "Can I have a quick word? Er -
now?"
When he paused for breath, Sirius said, "Did you tell Dumbledore this?"
"Yes," said Harry impatiently, "but he didn't tell me what it meant. Well, he doesn't tell me
anything any more."
"I'm sure he would have told you if it was anything to worry about," said Sirius steadily.
"But that's not all," said Harry, in a voice only a little above a whisper. "Sirius, I... I think I'm
Dumbledore - Sirius, I wanted to attack him!"
"It must have been the aftermath of the vision, that's all," said Sirius. "You were still thinking of
the dream or whatever it was and -"
"It wasn't that," said Harry, shaking his head, "it was like something rose up inside me, like
there's a snake inside me."
"You need to sleep," said Sirius firmly. "You're going to have breakfast, then go upstairs to bed,
might have died. Just stop worrying."
"There isn't any Seer blood in your family, is there?" she enquired curiously, as they sat side by
"No," said Harry, thinking of Professor Trelawney and feeling insulted.
"No," said Tonks musingly, "no, I suppose it's not really prophecy you're doing, is it? I mean,
you're not seeing the future, you're seeing the present... it's odd, isn't it? Useful, though..."
"Not far from here," grunted Moody as they stepped out into the wintry air on a broad store-lined
just behind; Harry knew the eye was rolling in all directions under the tilted hat. "Wasn't easy to
crowd."
"Here we go," said Moody a moment later.
years out of date. Large signs on all the dusty doors read: "Closed for Refurbishment". Harry
"It'snever open, that place..."
"Right," said Tonks, beckoning them towards a window displaying nothing but a particularly
pinafore dress. "Everybody ready?"
dummy, her breath steaming up the glass. "Wotcher... We're here to see Arthur
Weasley."
"C'mon," growled Moody, giving Harry yet another poke in the back, and together they stepped
"Are they doctors?" he asked Ron quietly.
"Doctors?" said Ron, looking startled. "Those Muggle nutters that cut people up? Nah, they're
Healers."
"Over here!" called Mrs. Weasley above the renewed c langing of the warlock in the corner, and
"It's these - ouch - shoes my brother gave me - ow- they're eating my - OUCH - feet - look at
them off." He hopped from one foot to the other as though dancing on hot coals.
"The shoes don't prevent you reading, do they?" said the blonde witch, irritably pointing at a
large sign to the left of her desk. "You want Spell Damage, fourth floor. Just like it says on the
floor guide. Next!"
"I'm here to see Broderick Bode!" he wheezed.
"Ward forty-nine, but I'm afraid you're wasting your time," said the witch dismissively. "He's
completely addled, you know - still thinks he's a teapot. Next!"
"Fourth floor," said the witch, in a bored voice, without asking, and the man disappeared through
the double doors beside the desk, holding his daughter like an oddly shaped balloon. "Next!"
"Hello," she said, "my husband, Arthur Weasley, was supposed to be moved to a different ward
this morning, could you tell us -?"
"Arthur Weasley?" said the witch, running her finger down a long list in front of her. "Yes, first
floor, second door on the right, Dai Llewellyn Ward."
"Thank you," said Mrs. Weasley. "Come on, you lot."
"We'll wait outside, Molly," Tonks said. "Arthur won't want too many visitors at once... it ought to be just the family first."
out a hand and pushed him through the door, saying, "Don't be silly, Harry, Arthur wants to
thank you."
"Hello!" he called, throwing the Prophet aside. "Bill just left, Molly, had to get back to work, but he says he'll drop in on you later."
"How are you, Arthur?" asked Mrs. Weasley, bending down to kiss his cheek and looking
anxiously into his face. "You're still looking a bit peaky."
"I feel absolutely fine," said Mr. Weasley brightly, holding out his good arm to give Ginny a hug.
"If they could only take the bandages off, I'd be f it to go home."
"Why can't they take them off, Dad?" asked Fred.
"Well, I start bleeding like mad every time they try," said Mr. Weasley cheerfully, reaching across for his wand, which lay on his bedside cabinet, and waving it so that six extra chairs appeared at his bedside to seat them all. "It seems there was some rather unusual kind of poison in that snake's fangs that keeps wounds open. They're sure they'll find an antidote, though; they say they've had much worse cases than mine, and in the meantime I just have to keep taking a
Blood-Replenishing Potion every hour. But that fellow over there," he said, dropping his voice
the ceiling. "Bitten by a werewolf, poor chap. No cure at all."
"A werewolf?" whispered Mrs. Weasley, looking alarmed. "Is he safe in a public ward? Shouldn't he be in a private room?"
"It's two weeks till full moon," Mr. Weasley reminded her quietly. "They've been talking to him this morning, the Healers, you know, trying to persuade him he'll be able to lead an almost
personally, very nice man, who finds the condition quite easy to manage."
"What did he say?" asked George.
"Said he'd give me another bite if I didn't shut up," said Mr. Weasley sadly. "And that woman
over there," he indicated the only other occupied bed, which was right beside the door, "won't
take off the dressings."
"So, you going to tell us what happened, Dad?" asked Fred, pulling his chair closer to the bed.
"Well, you already know, don't you?" said Mr. Weasley, with a significant smile at Harry. "It's
very simple - I'd had a very long day, dozed off, got sneaked up on and bitten."
"Is it in the Prophet, you being attacked?" asked Fred, indicating the newspaper Mr. Weasley had cast aside.
"No, of course not," said Mr. Weasley, with a slightly bitter smile, "the Ministry wouldn't want
everyone to know a dirty great serpent got --"
"Arthur!" Mrs. Weasley warned him.
"- got - er - me," Mr. Weasley said hastily, though Harry was quite sure that was not what he had
"So where were you when it happened, Dad?" asked George.
"That's my business," said Mr. Weasley, though with a small smile. He snatched up the Daily
Prophe, shook it open again and said, "I was just reading about Willy Widdershins's arrest
in the wreckage covered from head to foot in -"
"When you say you were 'on duty'," Fred interrupted in a low voice, "what were you doing?"
"You heard your father," whispered Mrs. Weasley, "we are not discussing this here! Go on about
Willy Widdershins, Arthur."
"Well, don't ask me how, but he actually got off the toilet charge," said Mr. Weasley grimly. "I
can only suppose gold changed hands -"
"You were guarding it, weren't you?" said George quietly. "The weapon? The thing You-Know-
Who's after?"
"George, be quiet!" snapped Mrs. Weasley.
"Anyway," said Mr. Weasley, in a raised voice, "this time Willy's been caught selling biting
wonder which ward they're in?"
"Didn't you say You-Know-Who's got a snake, Harry?" asked Fred, looking at his father for a
reaction. "A massive one? You saw it the night he returned, didn't you?"
"That's enough," said Mrs. Weasley crossly. "Mad-Eye and Tonks are outside, Arthur, they want
to come and see you. And you lot can wait outside," she added to her children and Harry. "You
can come and say goodbye afterwards. Go on."
"Fine," he said coolly, rummaging in his pockets, "be like that. Don't tell us anything."
"Looking for these?" said George, holding out what looked like a tangle of flesh-colored string.
"You read my mind," said Fred, grinning. "Let's see if St. Mungo's puts Imperturbable Charms on its ward doors, shall we?"
"Go on, Harry, take it! You saved Dad's life. If anyone's got the right to eavesdrop on him, it's
you."
"Okay, go!" Fred whispered.
"... they searched the whole area but couldn't find the snake anywhere. It just seems to have
in, can he?"
"I reckon he sent it as a lookout," growled Moody, "cause he's not had any luck so far, has he?
happen?"
"Yes," said Mrs. Weasley. She sounded rather uneasy. "You know, Dumbledore seems almost to
have been waiting for Harry to see something like this."
"Yeah, well," said Moody, "there's something funny about the Potter kid, we all know that."
"Dumbledore seemed worried about Harry when I spoke to him this morning," whispered Mrs
"Course he's worried," growled Moody. "The boy's seeing things from inside You-Know-Who's
him --"
"Are you all right, Harry, dear?" whispered Mrs. Wea sley leaning across Ginny to speak to him as the train rattled along through its dark tunnel. "You don't look very well. Are you feeling sick?"
"Harry, dear, are you sure you're all right?" said Mrs. Weasley in a worried voice, as they walked around the unkempt patch of grass in the middle of Grimmauld Place. "You look ever so pale... are you sure you slept this morning? You go upstairs to bed right now and you can have a couple of hours of sleep before dinner, all right?"
had dragged it halfway towards the door when a snide voice said, "Running away, are we?"
"Not running away, no," said Harry shortly, dragging his trunk a few more feet across the room.
"I thought," said Phineas Nigellus, stroking his pointed beard, "that to belong in Gryffindor house you were supposed to be brave! It looks to me as though you would have been better off in my own house. We Slytherins are brave, yes, but not stupid. For instance, given the choice, we will always choose to save our own necks."
"It's not my own neck I'm saving," said Harry tersely, tugging the trunk over a patch of
"Oh, I see," said Phineas Nigellus, still stroking his beard, "this is no cowardly flight - you are
being noble."
Harry ignored him. His hand was on the doorknob when Phineas Nigellus said lazily, "I have a
message for you from Albus Dumbledore."
"What is it?"
"'Stay where you are.'"
"I haven't moved!" said Harry, his hand still upon the doorknob. "So what's the message?"
"I have just given it to you, dolt," said Phineas Ni gellus smoothly. "Dumbledore says, 'Stay
where you are.'"
"Why?" said Harry eagerly, dropping the end of his trunk. "Why does he want me to stay? What
else did he say?"
"Nothing whatsoever," said Phineas Nigellus, raising a thin black eyebrow as though he found
"So that's it, is it?" he said loudly. "'Stay where you a re'! That's all anyone could tell me after I got attacked by those Dementors, too! Just stay put while the grown-ups sort it out, Harry! We won't bother telling you anything, though, because your tiny little brain might not be able to cope with it!"
"You know," said Phineas Nigellus, even more loudly than Harry "this is precisely why I loathed
to realize what the Dark Lord may be planning -"
"He is planning something to do with me, then?" said Harry swiftly.
"Did I say that?" said Phineas Nigellus, idly examining his silk gloves. "Now, if you will excuse
me, I have better things to do than listen to adolescent agonising... good-day to you."
"Fine, go then!" Harry bellowed at the empty frame. "And tell Dumbledore thanks for nothing!"
"Harry," said Ron's voice, from far, far away, "Mum says dinner's ready, but she'll save you
something if you want to stay in bed."
"I know you're in there," said Hermione's voice. "Will you please come out? I want to talk to
you."
"What are you doing here?" Harry asked her, pulling open the door as Buckbeak resumed his
scratching at the straw-strewn floor for any fragments of rat he may have dropped. "I thought you were skiing with your mum and dad?"
"Well, to tell the truth, skiing's not really my thing," said Hermione. "So, I've come here for
Christmas." There was snow in her hair and her face was pink with cold. "But don't tell Ron. I
Hogwarts to study. They want me to do well, they'll understand. Anyway," she said briskly,
"let's go to your bedroom, Ron's mum has lit a fire in there and she's sent up sandwiches."
"I came on the Knight Bus," said Hermione airily, pulling off her jacket before Harry had time to speak. "Dumbledore told me what had happened first thing this morning, but I had to wait for
given you all permission to visit. So..."
"How're you feeling?" asked Hermione.
"Fine," said Harry stiffly.
"Oh, don't lie, Harry," she said impatiently. "Ron and Ginny say you've been hiding from
everyone since you got back from St. Mungo's."
"They do, do they?" said Harry, glaring at Ron and Ginny. Ron looked down at his feet but
"Well, you have!" she said. "And you won't look at any of us!"
"It's you lot who won't look at me!" said Harry ang rily.
"Maybe you're taking it in turns to look, and keep missing each other," suggested Hermione, the
"Very funny," snapped Harry, turning away.
"Oh, stop feeling all misunderstood," said Hermione sharply. "Look, the others have told me what you overheard last night on the Extendable Ears -"
"Yeah?" growled Harry, his hands deep in his pockets as he watched the snow now falling
thickly outside. "All been talking about me, have you? Well, I'm getting used to it."
"We wanted to talk to you, Harry," said Ginny, "but as you've been hiding ever since we got back -"
"I didn't want anyone to talk to me," said Harry, w ho was feeling more and more nettled.
"Well, that was a bit stupid of you," said Ginny angrily, "seeing as you don't know anyone but
me who's been possessed by You-Know-Who, and I can tell you how it feels."
"I forgot," he said.
"Lucky you," said Ginny coolly.
"I'm sorry" Harry said, and he meant it. "So... so, do you think I'm being possessed, then?"
"Well, can you remember everything you've been doing?" Ginny asked. "Are there big blank
periods where you don't know what you've been up to?"
"No," he said.
"Then You-Know-Who hasn't ever possessed you," said Ginny simply. "When he did it to me, I
know how I got there."
"That dream I had about your dad and the snake, though --"
"Harry you've had these dreams before," Hermione said. "You had flashes of what Voldemort
was up to last year."
"This was different," said Harry, shaking his head. "I was inside that snake. It was like I was the
snake... what if Voldemort somehow transported me to London --?"
"One day," said Hermione, sounding thoroughly exasperated, "you'll read Hogwarts: A History,
Voldemort couldn't just make you fly out of your dormitory, Harry."
"You didn't leave your bed, mate," said Ron. "I saw you thrashing around in your sleep for at
least a minute before we could wake you up."
felt like joining in as they heard Sirius tramping past their door towards Buckbeak's room, singing "God Rest Ye, Merry Hippogriffs" at the top of his voice.
"Good haul this year," he informed Harry through a cloud of paper. "Thanks for the Broom
Compass, it's excellent; beats Hermiones - she got me a homework planner-"
given him, too, a book that resembled a diary except that it said things like "Do it today or later you'll pay!" every time he opend a page.
"Merry Christmas," said George. "Don't go downstairs for a bit."
"Why not?" said Ron.
"Mum's crying again," said Fred heavily. "Percy sent back his Christmas jumper."
"Without a note," added George. "Hasn't asked how Dad is or visited him or anything."
"We tried to comfort her," said Fred, moving around the bed to look at Harry's portrait. "Told her Percy's nothing more than a humungous pile of rat droppings."
"Didn't work," said George, helping himself to a Chocolate Frog. "So Lupin took over. Best let
him cheer her up before we go down for breakfast, I reckon."
"What's that supposed to be, anyway?" asked Fred, squinting at Dobby's painting. "Looks like a
gibbon with two black eyes."
"It's Harry!" said George, pointing at the back of the picture, "says so on the back!"
"Good likeness," said Fred, grinning. Harry threw his new homework diary at him; it hit the wall
opposite and fell to the floor where it said happily: "If you've dotted the 'i's and crossed the 't's then you may do whatever you please!"
They got up and dressed. They could hear the various inhabitants of the house calling "Merry
Christmas" to one another. On their way downstairs they met Hermione.
"Thanks for the book, Harry" she said happily. "I've been wanting that New Theory of
Numerology for ages! And that perfume's really unusual, Ron."
"No problem," said Ron. "Who's that for, anyway?" he added, nodding at the neatly wrapped
"Kreacher," said Hermione brightly.
"It had better not be clothes!" Ron warned her. "You know what Sirius said: Kreacher knows too much, we can't set him free!"
"It isn't clothes," said Hermione, "although if I had my way I'd certainly give him something to
bedroom."
"What bedroom?" said Harry, dropping his voice to a whisper as they were passing the portrait of Sirius's mother.
"Well, Sirius says it's not so much a bedroom, more a kind of -den," said Hermione. "Apparently he sleeps under the boiler in that cupboard off the kitchen."
the stove and sounded as though she had a bad head cold as she wished them "Merry Christmas,"
"So, is this Kreacher's bedroom?" said Ron, strolling over to a dingy door in the corner opposite
"Yes," said Hermione, now sounding a little nervous. "Er... I think we'd better knock."
"He must be sneaking around upstairs," he said, and without further ado pulled open the door.
"Urgh!"
"I think I'll just leave his present here," said Hermione, laying the package neatly in the middle
of the depression in the rags and blankets and closing the door quietly. "He'll find it later, that'll
be fine."
"Come to think of it," said Sirius, emerging from the pantry carrying a large turkey as they closed the cupboard door, "has anyone actually seen Kreacher lately?"
"I haven't seen him since the night we came back here," said Harry. "You were ordering him out of the kitchen."
"Yeah..." said Sirius, frowning. "You know, I think that's the last time I saw him, too... he must
be hiding upstairs somewhere."
"He couldn't have left, could he?" said Harry. "I mean, when you said 'out', maybe he thought you meant get out of the house?"
"No, no, house-elves can't leave unless they're given clothes. They're tied to their family's
house," said Sirius.
"They can leave the house if they really want to," Harry contradicted him. "Dobby did, he left the Malfoys' to give me warnings two years ago. He had to punish himself afterwards, but he still managed it."
Sirius looked slightly disconcerted for a moment, then said, "I'll look for him later, I expect I'll
might have crawled into the airing cupboard and died... but I mustn't get my hopes up."
"Family argument, eh?" smirked the blonde witch behind the desk. "You're the third I've seen
today... Spell Damage, fourth floor."
"Everything all right, Arthur?" asked Mrs. Weasley, after they had all greeted Mr. Weasley and
"Fine, fine," said Mr. Weasley, a little too heartily. "You -- er -- haven't seen Healer
Smethwyck, have you?"
"No," said Mrs. Weasley suspiciously, "why?"
"Nothing, nothing," said Mr. Weasley airily, starting to unwrap his pile of gifts. "Well, everyone
had a good day? What did you all get for Christmas? Oh, Harry - this is absolutely wonderful!" For he had just opened Harry's gift of fuse-wire and screwdrivers.
"Arthur," she said, with a snap in her voice like a mousetrap, "you've had your bandages
wouldn't need doing until tomorrow."
"What?" said Mr. Weasley, looking rather frightened and pulling the bed covers higher up his
chest. "No, no - it's nothing - it's -I-"
"Well - now don't get upset, Molly, but Augustus Pye had an idea... he's the Trainee Healer, you know, lovely young chap and very interested in... um... complementary medicine... I mean,
well on - on Muggle wounds -"
"Do you mean to tell me," said Mrs. Weasley, her voice growing louder with every word and
apparently unaware that her fellow visitors were scurrying for cover, "that you have been
messing about with Muggle remedies?"
"Not messing about, Molly, dear," said Mr. Weasley imploringly, "it was just - just something Pye and I thought we'd try - only, most unfortunately -- well, with these particular kinds of wounds - it doesn't seem to work as well as we'd hoped -"
"Meaning?"
"Well... well, I don't know whether you know what - what stitches are?"
"It sounds as though you've been trying to sew your skin back together," said Mrs. Weasley with
a snort of mirthless laughter, "but even you, Arthur, wouldn't be that stupid --"
"I fancy a cup of tea, too," said Harry, jumping to his feet.
they heard Mrs. Weasley shriek, "WHAT DO YOU MEAN, TH AT'S THE GENERAL IDEA?"
"Typical Dad," said Ginny, shaking her head as they set off up the corridor. "Stitches... I ask
you..."
"Well, you know, they do work well on non-magical wounds," said Hermione fairly. "I suppose
something in that snake's venom dissolves them or something. I wonder where the tearoom is?"
"Fifth floor," said Harry, remembering the sign over the welcome witch's desk.
"And what's that supposed to be?" he asked angrily, as the Healer pursued him through six more
"Tis a most grievous affliction of the skin, young master, that will leave you pockmarked and
more gruesome even than you are now -"
"Watch who you're calling gruesome!" said Ron, his ears turning red.
"- the only remedy is to take the liver of a toad, bind it tight about your throat, stand naked at the
full moon in a barrel of eels' eyes -"
"I have not got spattergroit!"
"But the unsightly blemishes upon your visage, young master -"
"They're freckles!" said Ron furiously. "Now get back in your own picture and leave me alone!"
"What floor's this?"
"I think it's the fifth," said Hermione.
"Nah, it's the fourth," said Harry, "one more --"
"Blimey!" said Ron, also staring at the man.
"Oh, my goodness," said Hermione suddenly, sounding breathless. "Professor Lockhart!"
"Well, hello there!" he said. "I expect you'd like my autograph, would you?"
"Hasn't changed much, has he?" Harry muttered to Ginny, who grinned.
"Er -- how are you, Professor?" said Ron, sounding slightly guilty. It had been Ron's
"I'm very well indeed, thank you!" said Lockhart exuberantly, pulling a rather battered peacockfeather quill from his pocket. "Now, how many autographs would you like? I can do joined-up writing now, you know!"
"Er - we don't want any at the moment, thanks," said Ron, raising his eyebrows at Harry, who
asked, "Professor, should you be wandering around the corridors? Shouldn't you be in a ward?"
then he said, "Haven't we met?"
"Er... yeah, we have," said Harry. "You used to teach us at Hogwarts, remember?"
"Teach?" repeated Lockhart, looking faintly unsettled. "Me? Did I?"
"Taught you everything you know, I expect, did I? Well, how about those autographs, then?
left out!"
"Gilderoy, you naughty boy, where have you wandered off to?"
"Oh, Gilderoy, you've got visitors! How lovely, and on Christmas Day, too! Do you know,
he never gets visitors, poor lamb, and I can't think why, he's such a sweetie, aren't you?"
"We're doing autographs!" Gilderoy told the Healer with another glittering smile. "They want
loads of them, won't take no for an answer! I just hope we've got enough photographs!"
"Listen to him," said the Healer, taking Lockhart's arm and beaming fondly at him as though he
were a precocious two-year-old. "He was rather well known a few years ago; we very much hope
But," she lowered her voice to a whisper, "he's a bit of a danger to himself, bless him... doesn't
have come to see him."
"Er," said Ron, gesturing uselessly at the floor above, "actually, we were just -- er -"
But the Healer was smiling expectantly at them, and Ron's feeble mutter of "going to have a cup
of tea" trailed away into nothingness. They looked at each other helplessly, then followed
"Let's not stay long," Ron said quietly.
The Healer pointed her wand at the door of the Janus Thickey Ward and muttered, "Alohomora."
"This is our long-term residents' ward," she informed Harry, Ron, Hermione and Ginny
in a low voice. "For permanent spell damage, you know. Of course, with intensive remedial potions and charms and a bit of luck, we can produce some improvement. Gilderoy does seem to be getting back some sense of himself; and we've seen a real improvement in Mr. Bode, he seems to be regaining th e power of speech very well, though he isn't speaking any language we recognize yet. Well, I must finish giving out the Christmas presents, I'll leave you all to chat."
"You can put them in envelopes," he said to Ginny, throwing the signed pictures into her lap one
by one as he finished them. "I am not forgotten, you know, no, I still receive a very great deal of
fan mail... Gladys Gudgeon writes weekly... I just wish I knew why." He paused, looking faintly puzzled, then beamed again and returned to his signing with renewed vigour. "I suspect it is simply my good looks..."
"Here you are, Agnes," said the Healer brightly to the furry-faced woman, handing her a small
pile of Christmas presents. "See, not forgotten, are you? And your son's sent an owl to say he's
visiting tonight, so that's nice, isn't it?"
"And look, Broderick, you've been sent a potted plant and a lovely calendar with a different fancy Hippogriff for each month; they'll brighten things up, won't they?" said the Healer, bustling along to the mumbling man, setting a rather ugly plant with long, swaying tentacles on the bedside cabinet and fixing the calendar to the wall with her wand. "And - oh, Mrs. Longbottom, are you leaving already?"
unnoticed and unquestioned, but Ron had also looked up at the sound of the name "Longbottom", and before Harry could stop him had called out, "Neville!"
"It's us, Neville!" said Ron brightly, getting to h i s feet. "Have you seen -? Lockhart's here!
Who've you been visiting?"
"Friends of yours, Neville, dear?" said Neville's grandmother graciously, bearing down upon
"Ah, yes," said his grandmother, looking closely at Harry and sticking out a shrivelled, clawlike
hand for him to shake. "Yes, yes, I know who you are, of course. Neville speaks most highly of
you."
"Er - thanks," said Harry, shaking hands. Neville did not look at him, but surveyed his own feet,
"And you two are clearly Weasleys," Mrs. Longbottom continued, proffering her hand regally to
Ron and Ginny in turn. "Yes, I know your parents -- not well, of course -- but fine people, fine
people... and you must be Hermione Granger?"
"Yes, Neville's told me all about you. Helped him out of a few sticky spots, haven't you? He's a
good boy," she said, casting a sternly appraising look down her rather bony nose at Neville, "but
he hasn't got his father's talent, I'm afraid to say." And she jerked her head in the direction of the two beds at the end of the ward, so that the stuffed vulture on her hat trembled alarmingly.
"What?" said Ron, looking amazed. (Harry wanted to stamp on Ron's foot, but that sort of thing
is much harder to bring off unnoticed when you're wearing jeans rather than robes.) "Is that
your dad down the end, Neville?"
"What's this?" said Mrs. Longbottom sharply. "Haven't you told your friends about your parents, Neville?"
"Well, it's nothing to be ashamed of!" said Mrs. Longbottom angrily. "You should be proud,
Neville, proud! They didn't give their health and their sanity so their only son would be ashamed of them, you know!"
"I'm not ashamed," said Neville, very faintly, still looking anywhere but at Harry and the others.
"Well, you've got a funny way of showing it!" said Mrs. Longbottom. "My son and his wife," she said, turning haughtily to Harry, Ron, Hermione and Ginny, "were tortured into insanity by You- Know-Who's followers."
"They were Aurors, you know, and very well respected within the wizarding community" Mrs.
Longbottom went on. "Highly gifted, the pair of them. I - yes, Alice dear, what is it?"
"Again?" said Mrs. Longbottom, sounding slightly weary. "Very well, Alice dear, very well -
Neville, take it, whatever it is."
"Very nice, dear," said Neville's grandmother in a falsely cheery voice, patting his mother on the
But Neville said quietly, "Thanks, Mum."
"Well, we'd better get back," sighed Mrs Longbottom, drawing on long green gloves. "Very nice
them to paper your bedroom by now."
"I never knew," said Hermione, who looked tearful.
"Nor did I," said Ron rather hoarsely.
"Nor me," whispered Ginny.
"I did," he said glumly. "Dumbledore told me but I promised I wouldn't tell anyone... that's what Bellatrix Lestrange got sent to Azkaban for, using the Cruciatus Curse on Neville's parents until they lost their minds."
"Bellatrix Lestrange did that?" whispered Hermione, horrified. "That woman Kreacher's got a
photo of in his den?"
"Look, I didn't learn joined-up writing for nothing, you know!"
"Harry, dear," said Mrs. Weasley, poking her head in to his and Ron's bedroom, where the pair of them were playing wizard chess watched by Hermione, Ginny and Crookshanks, "could you
come down to the kitchen? Professor Snape would like a word with you."
"Squash him - squash him, he's only a pawn, you idiot. Sorry, Mrs. Weasley, what did you say?"
"Professor Snape, dear. In the kitchen. He'd like a word."
"Snape?" said Harry blankly.
"Professor Snape, dear," said Mrs. Weasley reprovingly. "Now come on, quickly, he says he can't stay long."
"What's he want with you?" said Ron, looking unnerved as Mrs. Weasley withdrew from the
room. "You haven't done anything, have you?"
"No!" said Harry indignantly, racking his brains to think what he could have done that would
"Er," said Harry, to announce his presence.
"Sit down, Potter."
"You know," said Sirius loudly, leaning back on his rear chair legs and speaking to the ceiling, "I
think I'd prefer it if you didn't give orders here, Snape. It's my house, you see."
"I was supposed to see you alone, Potter," said Snape, the familiar sneer curling his mouth, "but
Black -"
"I'm his godfather," said Sirius, louder than ever.
"I am here on Dumbledore's orders," said Snape, whose voice, by contrast, was becoming more
and more quietly waspish, "but by all means stay, Black, I know you like to feel... involved."
"What's that supposed to mean?" said Sirius, letting his chair fall back on to all four legs with a
"Merely that I am sure you must feel - ah - frustrated by the fact that you can do nothing useful,"
Snape laid a delicate stress on the word, "for the Order."
"The Headmaster has sent me to tell you, Potter, that it is his wish for you to study Occlumency
this term."
"Study what?" said Harry blankly.
"Occlumency, Potter. The magical Defense of the mind against external penetration. An obscure
branch of magic, but a highly useful one."
"Why do I have to study Occlu -- thing?" he blurted out.
"Because the Headmaster thinks it a good idea," said Snape smoothly. "You will receive private
Umbridge. You understand?"
"Yes," said Harry. "Who's going to be teaching me?"
"I am," he said.
"Why can't Dumbledore teach Harry?" asked Sirius aggressively. "Why you?"
"I suppose because it is a headmaster's privilege to delegate less enjoyable tasks," said Snape
silkily. "I assure you I did not beg for the job." He got to his feet. "I will expect you at six o'clock on Monday evening, Potter. My office. If anybody asks, you are taking remedial Potions.
Nobody who has seen you in my classes could deny you need them."
"Wait a moment," said Sirius, sitting up straighter in his chair.
"I am in rather a hurry, Black. Unlike you, I do not have unlimited leisure time."
"I'll get to the point, then," said Sirius, standing up. He was rather taller than Snape who, Harry
wand. "If I hear you're using these Occlumency lessons to give Harry a hard time, you'll have
me to answer to."
"How touching," Snape sneered. "But surely you have noticed that Potter is very like his father?"
"Yes, I have," said Sirius proudly.
"Well then, you'll know he's so arrogant that criticism simply bounces off him," Snape said
"Sirius!" said Harry loudly, but Sirius appeared not to hear him.
"I've warned you, Snivellus," said Sirius, his face barely a foot from Snape's, "I don't care if
Dumbledore thinks you've reformed, I know better -"
"Oh, but why don't you tell him so?" whispered Snape. "Or are you afraid he might not take very
seriously the advice of a man who has been hiding inside his mother's house for six months?"
"Tell me, how is Lucius Malfoy these days? I expect he's delighted his lapdog's working at
Hogwarts, isn't he?"
"Speaking of dogs," said Snape softly, "did you know that Lucius Malfoy recognized you last
platform... gave you a cast-iron excuse not to leave your hidey-hole in future, didn't it?"
"NO!" Harry yelled, vaulting over the table and trying to get in between them. "Sirius, don't!"
"Are you calling me a coward?" roared Sirius, trying to push Harry out of the way, but Harry
"Why, yes, I suppose I am," said Snape.
"Harry - get - out - of - it!" snarled Sirius, pushing him aside with his free hand.
"Cured!" he announced brightly to the kitchen at large. "Completely cured!"
"Merlin's beard," said Mr. Weasley, the smile slidin g off his face, "what's going on here?"
"Six o'clock, Monday evening, Potter."
"What's been going on?" asked Mr. Weasley again.
"Nothing, Arthur," said Sirius, who was breathing heavily as though he had just run a long
distance. "Just a friendly little chat between two old school friends." With what looked like an
enormous effort, he smiled. "So... you're cured? That's great news, really great."
"Yes, isn't it?" said Mrs. Weasley, leading her husb and forward to a chair. "Healer Smethwyck
Arthur's learned his lesson about dabbling in Muggle medicine, haven't you, dear?" she added,
"Yes, Molly, dear," said Mr. Weasley meekly.
"Dumbledore wants to stop you having those dreams about Voldemort," said Hermione at once. "Well, you won't be sorry not to have them any more, will you?"
"Extra lessons with Snape?" said Ron, sounding aghast. "I'd rather have the nightmares!"
"I want you to take this," he said quietly, thrusting a badly wrapped package roughly the size of a paperback book into Harry's hands.
"What is it?" Harry asked.
"A way of letting me know if Snape's giving you a hard time. No, don't open it in here!" said
Sirius, with a wary look at Mrs. Weasley, who was trying to persuade the twins to wear handknitted mittens. "I doubt Molly would approve - but I want you to use it if you need me, all
right?"
"Okay," said Harry, stowing the package away in the inside pocket of his jacket, but he knew he
"Let's go, then," said Sirius, clapping Harry on the shoulder and smiling grimly, and before
"Goodbye, Harry, take care," said Mrs. Weasley, hugg ing him.
"See you, Harry, and keep an eye out for snakes for me!" said Mr. Weasley genially, shaking his
"Right - yeah," said Harry distractedly; it was his last chance to tell Sirius to be careful; he
so Sirius was giving him a brief, one-armed hug, and saying gruffly, "Look after yourself,
Harry." Next moment, Harry found himself being shunted out into the icy winter air, with Tonks
"Come on, the quicker we get on the bus the better," said Tonks, and Harry thought there was
"Welcome to the -"
"Yes, yes, we know, thank you," said Tonks swiftly. "On, on, get on -"
"Ere - it's 'Arry -!"
"If you shout his name I will curse you into oblivion," muttered Tonks menacingly, now shunting
"I've always wanted to go on this thing," said Ron happily, joining Harry on board and looking
"Looks like we'll have to split up," said Tonks briskly, looking around for empty chairs. "Fred,
George and Ginny, if you just take those seats at the back... Remus can stay with you."
"Just outside Birmingham," said Stan happily, answe ring Harry's unasked question as Ron
struggled up from the floor. "You keepin' well, then, 'Arry? I seen your name in the paper loads
nutter when we met 'im, just goes to show, dunnit?"
"I've changed my mind," muttered Ron, picking himse lf up from the floor for the sixth time, "I
never want to ride on this thing again."
"Listen, it's 'Ogwarts stop after this," said Stan brightly, swaying towards them. "That bossy
just gonna let Madam Marsh off first, though -" there was more retching from downstairs, followed by a horrible spattering sound "- she's not feeling 'er best."
"You'll be safe once you're in the grounds," said Tonks, casting a careful eye around at the
deserted road. "Have a good term, okay?"
"Look after yourselves," said Lupin, shaking hands all round and reaching Harry last. "And
listen..." he lowered his voice while the rest of the m exchanged last-minute goodbyes with
Tonks, "Harry, I know you don't like Snape, but he is a superb Occlumens and we all - Sirius
included - want you to learn to protect yourself, so work hard, all right?"
"Yeah, all right," said Harry heavily, looking up into Lupin's prematurely lined face. "See you,
then."
"I'll let you know in the usual way when the next one is," Harry said over and over again, "but I
can't do it tonight, I've got to go to - er - remedial Potions."
"You take remedial Potions!" asked Zacharias Smith superciliously, having cornered Harry in the Entrance Hall after lunch. "Good Lord, you must be terrible. Snape doesn't usually give extra
lessons, does he?"
"Shall I jinx him? I can still get him from here," he said, raising his wand and taking aim between Smith's shoulder blades.
"Forget it," said Harry dismally. "It's what everyone's going to think, isn't it? That I'm really
stup --"
"Hi, Harry," said a voice behind him. He turned round and found Cho standing there.
"Oh," said Harry as his stomach leapt uncomfortably. "Hi."
"We'll be in the library, Harry," said Hermione firmly as she seized Ron above the elbow and
"Had a good Christmas?" asked Cho.
"Yeah, not bad," said Harry.
"Mine was pretty quiet," said Cho. For some reason, she was looking rather embarrassed.
"Erm... there's another Hogsmeade trip next month, did you see the notice?"
"What? Oh, no, I haven't checked the noticeboard since I got back."
"Yes, it's on Valentine's Day..."
"Right," said Harry, wondering why she was telling him this. "Well, I suppose you want to -?"
"Only if you do," she said eagerly.
Harry stared. He had been about to say, "I suppose you want to know when the next D.A. meetingis?" but her response did not seem to fit.
"I - er --" he said.
"Oh, it's okay if you don't," she said, looking mortified. "Don't worry. I - I'll see you around."
"Cho! Hey - CHO!"
"Er - d'you want to come into Hogsmeade with me on Valentine's Day?"
"Oooh, yes!" she said, blushing crimson and beaming at him.
"Right... well... that's settled then," said Harry, and feeling that the day was not going to be a
"Shut the door behind you, Potter."
"Well, Potter, you know why you are here," he said. "The Headmaster has asked me to teach you
Occlumency. I can only hope that you prove more adept at it than at Potions."
"Right," said Harry tersely.
"This may not be an ordinary class, Potter," said Snape, his eyes narrowed malevolently, "but I
am still your teacher and you will therefore call me 'sir' or 'professor' at all times."
"Yes... sir," said Harry.
Snape continued to survey him through narrowed eyes for a moment, then said, "Now,
mind against magical intrusion and influence."
"And why does Professor Dumbledore think I need it, sir?" said Harry, looking directly into
Snape looked back at him for a moment and then said contemptuously, "Surely even you could
have worked that out by now, Potter? The Dark Lord is highly skilled at Legilimency -"
"What's that? Sir?"
"It is the ability to extract feelings and memories from another persons mind -"
"He can read minds?" said Harry quickly, his worst fears confirmed.
"You have no subtlety, Potter," said Snape, his dark eyes glittering. "You do not understand fine
distinctions. It is one of the shortcomings that makes you such a lamentable potion-maker."
"Only Muggles talk of 'mind-reading'. The mind is not a book, to be opened at will and examined at leisure. Thoughts are not etched on the inside of skulls, to be perused by any invader. The mind is a complex and many-layered thing, Potter - or at least, most minds are." He smirked. "It is true, however, that those who have mastered Legilimency are able, under certain
conditions, to delve into the minds of their victims and to interpret their findings correctly. The Dark Lord, for instance, almost always knows when somebody is lying to him. Only those skilled at Occlumency are able to shut down those feelings and memories that contradict the lie, and so can utter falsehoods in his presence without detection."
"So he could know what we're thinking right now? Sir?"
"The Dark Lord is at a considerable distance and the walls and grounds of Hogwarts are guarded
within them," said Snape. "Time and space matter in magic, Potter. Eye contact is often essential
to Legilimency."
"Well then, why do I have to learn Occlumency?"
"The usual rules do not seem to apply with you, Potter. The curse that failed to kill you seems to
for this to continue. He wishes me to teach you how to close your mind to the Dark Lord."
"But why does Professor Dumbledore want to stop it?" he asked abruptly. "I don't like it much,
Professor Dumbledore wouldn't have been able to save him, would he? Sir?"
"It appears that the Dark Lord has been unaware of the connection between you and himself until
-"
"The one with the snake and Mr. Weasley?"
"Do not interrupt me, Potter," said Snape in a dangerous voice. "As I was saying, the vision you
thoughts -"
"I saw inside the snake's head, not his!"
"I thought I just told you not to interrupt me, Potter?"
"How come I saw through the snakes eyes if it's Voldemort's thoughts I'm sharing?"
"Do not say the Dark Lord's name!" spat Snape.
"Professor Dumbledore says his name," said Harry quietly.
"Dumbledore is an extremely powerful wizard," Snape muttered. "While he may feel secure
enough to use the name... the rest of us..." He rubbed his left forearm, apparently unconsciously, on the spot where Harry knew the Dark Mark was burned into his skin.
"I just wanted to know," Harry began again, forcing his voice back to politeness, "why -"
"You seem to have visited the snake's mind because that was where the Dark Lord was at that
particular moment," snarled Snape. "He was possessing the snake at the time and so you dreamed you were inside it, too."
"And Vol-- he - realized I was there?"
"It seems so," said Snape coolly.
"How do you know?" said Harry urgently. "Is this just Professor Dumbledore guessing, or -?"
"I told you," said Snape, rigid in his chair, his eyes slits, "to call me 'sir'."
"Yes, sir," said Harry impatiently, "but how do you know -?"
"It is enough that we know," said Snape repressively. "The important point is that the Dark Lord is now aware that you are gaining access to his thoughts and feelings. He has also deduced that the process is likely to work in reverse; that is to say, he has realized that he might be able to
access your thoughts and feelings in return -"
"And he might try and make me do things?" asked Harry. "Sir?" he added hurriedly.
"He might," said Snape, sounding cold and unconcerned. "Which brings us back to Occlumency."
"Stand up and take out your wand, Potter."
"You may use your wand to attempt to disarm me, or defend yourself in any other way you can
think of," said Snape.
"And what are you going to do?" Harry asked, eyeing Snape's wand apprehensively.
"I am about to attempt to break into your mind," said Snape softly. "We are going to see how well you resist. I have been told that you have already shown aptitude at resisting the Imperius Curse. You will find that similar powers are needed for this... brace yourself, now. Legilimens!"
"No," said a voice inside Harry's head, as the memory of Cho drew nearer, "you're not watching
that, you're not watching it, it's private -"
"Did you mean to produce a Stinging Hex?" asked Snape coolly.
"No," said Harry bitterly, getting up from the floor.
"I thought not," said Snape, watching him closely. "You let me get in too far. You lost control."
"Did you see everything I saw?" Harry asked, unsure whether he wanted to hear the answer.
"Flashes of it," said Snape, his lip curling. "To whom did the dog belong?"
"My Aunt Marge," Harry muttered, hating Snape.
"Well, for a first attempt that was not as poor as it might have been," said Snape, raising his wand once more. "You managed to stop me eventually, though you wasted time and energy shouting. You must remain focused. Repel me with your brain and you will not need to resort to your wand."
"I'm trying," said Harry angrily, "but you're not telling me how!"
"Manners, Potter," said Snape dangerously. "Now, I want you to close your eyes."
"Clear your mind, Potter," said Snape's cold voice. "Let go of all emotion..."
"You're not doing it, Potter... you will need more discipline than this... focus, now..."
"Let's go again... on the count of three... one - two - three -Legilimens!"
"NOOOOOOO!"
"Get up!" said Snape sharply. "Get up! You are not trying, you are making no effort. You are
allowing me access to memories you fear, handing me weapons!"
"I - am - making - an - effort," he said through clenched teeth.
"I told you to empty yourself of emotion!"
"Yeah? Well, I'm finding that hard at the moment," Harry snarled.
"Then you will find yourself easy prey for the Dark Lord!" said Snape savagely. "Fools who wear their hearts proudly on their sleeves, who cannot control their emotions, who wallow in sad
stand no chance against his powers! He will penetrate your mind with absurd ease, Potter!"
"I am not weak," said Harry in a low voice, fury now pumping through him so that he thought he might attack Snape in a moment.
"Then prove it! Master yourself!" spat Snape. "Control your anger, discipline your mind! We
shall try again! Get ready, now! Legilimens!"
"I KNOW! I KNOW!"
"What happened then, Potter?" he asked, eyeing Harry intently.
"I saw - I remembered," Harry panted. "I've just realized..."
"Realized what?" asked Snape sharply.
"What's in the Department of Mysteries?"
"What did you say?" Snape asked quietly and Harry saw, with deep satisfaction, that Snape was
"I said, what's in the Department of Mysteries, sir?" Harry said.
"And why," said Snape slowly, "would you ask such a thing?"
"Because" said Harry, watching Snape's face closely, "that corridor I've just seen - I've been dreaming about it for months -- I've just recognized it - it leads to the Department of Mysteries... and I think Voldemort wants something from --"
"I have told you not to say the Dark Lord's name!"
"There are many things in the Department of Mysteries, Potter, few of which you would
understand and none of which concern you. Do I make myself plain?"
"Yes," Harry said, still rubbing his prickling scar, which was becoming more painful.
"I want you back here same time on Wednesday. We will continue work then."
"Fine," said Harry. He was desperate to get out of Snape's office and find Ron and Hermione.
"You are to rid your mind of all emotion every night before sleep; empty it, make it blank and
calm, you understand?"
"Yes," said Harry, who was barely listening.
"And be warned, Potter... I shall know if you have not practiced"
"Right," Harry mumbled. He picked up his schoolbag, swung it over his shoulder and hurried
"How did it go?" Hermione whispered, and then, looking concerned. "Are you all right, Harry?"
"Yeah... fine... I dunno," said Harry impatiently, wincing as pain shot through his scar again. "Listen... I've just realized something"
"So... so are you saying..." whispered Ron, as Madam Pince swept past, squeaking slightly, "that the weapon - the thing You-Know-Who's after -- is in the Ministry of Magic?"
"In the Department of Mysteries, it's got to be," H arry whispered. "I saw that door when your dad took me down to the courtrooms for my hearing and it's definitely the same one he was guarding when the snake bit him."
"Of course," she breathed.
"Of course what?" said Ron rather impatiently.
"Ron, think about it... Sturgis Podmore was trying to get through a door at the Ministry of
Magic... it must have been that one, it's too much of a coincidence!"
"How come Sturgis was trying to break in when he's on our side?" said Ron.
"Well, I don't know," Hermione admitted. "That is a bit odd..."
"So what's in the Department of Mysteries?" Harry asked Ron. "Has your dad ever mentioned
anything about it?"
"I know they call the people who work in there 'Unspeakables',"said Ron, frowning. "Because no one really seems to know what they do - weird place to have a weapon."
"It's not weird at all, it makes perfect sense," said Hermione. "It will be something top secret that the Ministry has been developing, I expect... Harry, are you sure you're all right?"
"Yeah... fine..." he said, lowering his hands, which we re trembling. "I just feel a bit... I don't
like Occlumency much."
"I expect anyone would feel shaky if they'd had their mind attacked over and over again," said
Hermione sympathetically. "Look, let's get back to the common room, we'll be a bit more
comfortable there."
"Headless Hats!" shouted George, as Fred waved a pointed hat decorated with a fluffy pink
feather at the watching students. "Two Galleons each, watch Fred, now!"
"And off again!" shouted George, and Fred's hand groped for a moment in what seemed to be
"How do those hats work, then?" said Hermione, distracted from her homework and watching
Fred and George closely. "I mean, obviously it's some kind of Invisibility Spell, but it's rather
I'd imagine the charm wouldn't have a very long life though."
"I'm going to have to do this tomorrow," he muttered, pushing the books he had just taken out of his bag back inside it.
"Well, write it in your homework planner then!" said Hermione encouragingly. "So you don't
forget!"
"Don't leave it till later, you big second-rater!" chided the book as Harry scribbled down
"I think I'll go to bed," said Harry, stuffing the homework planner back into his bag and making a mental note to drop it in the fire the first opportunity he got.
"Harry? HARRY!"
"What happened?" he said.
"I... dunno..." Harry gasped, sitting up again. "He's really happy... really happy..."
"You-Know-Who is?"
"Something good's happened," mumbled Harry. He was shaking as badly as he had done after
seeing the snake attack Mr. Weasley and felt very sick. "Something he's been hoping for."
"Hermione told me to come and check on you," said Ron in a low voice, helping Harry to his
feet. "She says your Defenses will be low at the moment, after Snape's been fiddling around with
your mind... still, I suppose it'll help in the long run, won't it?" He looked doubtfully at Harry as
"What?" said Harry and Ron together.
"Black?" said Harry loudly. "Not -?"
"Shh!" whispered Hermione desperately. "Not so loud - just read it!"
"We find ourselves, most unfortunately, in the same position we were two and a half years ago
when the murderer Sirius Black escaped," said Fudge last night. "Nor do we think the two
cautious. On no account should any of these individuals be approached."
"There you are, Harry," said Ron, looking awestruck. "That's why he was happy last night."
"I don't believe this," snarled Harry, "Fudge is blaming the breakout on Sirius?"
"What other options does he have?" said Hermione bitterly. "He can hardly say, 'everyone,
spent a good six months telling everyone you and Dumbledore are liars, hasn't he?"
"Oh my -" said Hermione wonderingly, still staring at the newspaper.
"What now?" said Harry quickly; he was feeling jumpy.
"It's... horrible," said Hermione, looking shaken. She fold ed back page ten of the newspaper and handed it to Harry and Ron.
"St. Mungo's deeply regrets the death of Mr. Bode, whose health was improving steadily prior to
"We have strict guidelines on the decorations permitted on our wards but it appears that Healer
"St. Mungo's is as yet unable to account for the presence of the plant on the ward and asks any
witch or wizard with information to come forward."
"Bode..." said Ron. "Bode. It rings a bell..."
"We saw him," Hermione whispered. "In St. Mungo's, remember? He was in the bed opposite
Healer - said it was a Christmas present."
"How come we didn't recognize Devils Snare? We've seen it before... we could've stopped this
from happening."
"Who expects Devils Snare to turn up in a hospital disguised as a pot plant?" said Ron sharply.
"It's not our fault, whoever sent it to the bloke is to blame! They must be a real prat, why didn't
they check what they were buying?"
"Oh, come on, Ron!" said Hermione shakily. "I don't think anyone could put Devils Snare in a
as well... if the plant was sent anonymously, how's anyone ever going to find out who did it?"
"I met Bode," he said slowly. "I saw him at the Ministry with your dad."
"I've heard Dad talk about him at home! He was an Unspeakable - he worked in the Department
of Mysteries!"
"Where are you going?" said Ron, startled.
"To send a letter," said Hermione, swinging her bag on to her shoulder. "It... well, I don't know
whether... but it's worth trying... and I'm the only one who can."
"I hate it when she does that," grumbled Ron, as he and Harry got up from the table and made
their own, slower way out of the Great Hall. "Would it kill her to tell us what she's up to for
once? It'd take her about ten more seconds - hey, Hagrid!"
"All righ', you two?" he said, trying to muster a smile but managing only a kind of pained
"Are you okay, Hagrid?" asked Harry, following him as he lumbered after the Ravenclaws.
"Fine, fine," said Hagrid with a feeble assumption of airiness; he waved a hand and narrowly
missed concussing a frightened-looking Professor Vector, who was passing. "Jus' busy, yeh
probation," he mumbled.
"You're on probation?" said Ron very loudly, so that many of the passing students looked around curiously. "Sorry - I mean - you're on probation?" he whispered.
"Yeah," said Hagrid. "S'no more'n I expected, ter tell yeh the truth. Yeh migh' not've picked up
on it, bu' that inspection didn' go too well, yeh know... anyway," he sighed deeply. "Bes' go an'
yeh, Harry... Ron..."
"And I don't know how you stand it - it's horrible," she said bluntly, dumping far too much
"They obviously can't talk freely in the staff room any more," said Hermione in a low voice, as
the Charms classroom one day. "Not with Umbridge there."
"Reckon they know anything new?" said Ron, gazing back over his shoulder at the three teachers.
"If they do, we're not going to hear about it, are we?" said Harry angrily. "Not after Decree...
what number are we on now?" For new notices had appeared on the house noticeboards the
"Exploding Snap's got nothing to do with Defense Against the Dark Arts, Professor! That's not
information relating to your subject!"
"If she catches yeh, it'll be all of our necks on the line," he told them flatly, and with no desire to do anything that might jeoparize his job further they abstained from walking down to his hut in the evenings.
"Maybe it's a bit like an illness," said Hermione, looking concerned when Harry confided in her
and Ron. "A fever or something. It has to get worse before it gets better."
"The lessons with Snape are making it worse," said Harry flatly. "I'm getting sick of my scar
hurting and I'm getting bored with walking down that corridor every night." He rubbed his
forehead angrily. "I just wish the door would open, I'm sick of standing staring at it -"
"That's not funny," said Hermione sharply. "Dumbledore doesn't want you to have dreams about
to have to work a bit harder in your lessons."
"I am working!" said Harry nettled. "You try it some time - Snape trying to get inside your head - it's not a bundle of laughs, you know!"
"Maybe..." said Ron slowly.
"Maybe what?" said Hermione, rather snappishly.
"Maybe it's not Harry's fault he can't close his mind," said Ron darkly.
"What do you mean?" said Hermione.
"Well, maybe Snape isn't really trying to help Harry..."
"Maybe," he said again, in a lower voice, "he's actually trying to open Harry's mind a bit wider... make it easier for You-Know --"
"Shut up, Ron," said Hermione angrily. "How many times have you suspected Snape, and when
enough."
"He used to be a Death Eater," said Ron stubbornly. "And we've never seen proof that he really
swapped sides."
"Dumbledore trusts him," Hermione repeated. "And if we can't trust Dumbledore, we can't trust
anyone."
"And about time! If it hadn't come today..." she said, eagerly tearing open the envelope and
"Listen, Harry," she said, looking up at him, "this is really important. Do you think you could
meet me in the Three Broomsticks around midday?"
"Well... I dunno," said Harry uncertainly. "Cho might be expecting me to spend the whole day
with her. We never said what we were going to do."
"Well, bring her along if you must," said Hermione urgently. "But will you come?"
"Well... all right, but why?"
"I haven't got time to tell you now, I've got to answer this quickly."
"Are you coming?" Harry asked Ron, but he shook his head, looking glum.
"I can't come into Hogsmeade at all; Angelina wants a full day's training. Like it's going to help;
worse than I am." He heaved a great sigh. "I dunno why Angelina won't just let me resign."
"It's because you're good when you're on form, that's why," said Harry irritably.
"Hi," said Cho slightly breathlessly.
"Hi," said Harry.
They stared at each other for a moment, then Harry said, "Well - er -- shall we go, then?"
"Oh - yes..."
"You really miss it, don't you?" said Cho.
"Yeah," sighed Harry. "I do."
"Remember the first time we played against each other, in the third year?" she asked him.
"Yeah," said Harry, grinning. "You kept blocking me."
"And Wood told you not to be a gentleman and knock me off my broom if you had to," said Cho,
smiling reminiscently. "I heard he got taken on by Pride of Portree, is that right?"
"Nah, it was Puddlemere United; I saw him at the World Cup last year."
"Oh, I saw you there, too, remember? We were on the same campsite. It was really good, wasn't
it?"
"Potter and Chang!" screeched Pansy, to a chorus of snide giggles. "Urgh, Chang, I don't think
much of your taste... at least Diggory was good-looking!"
"So... where d'you want to go?" Harry asked as they entered Hogsmeade. The High Street was
"Oh... I don't mind," said Cho, shrugging. "Urn... shall we just have a look in the shops or
something?"
"It's funny, isn't it," said Cho in a low voice, gazing up at the pictures of the Death Eaters,
"remember when that Sirius Black escaped, and there were Dementors all over Hogsmeade
anywhere..."
"Yeah," said Harry, tearing his eyes away from Bellatrix Lestrange's face to glance up and down
the High Street. "Yeah, that is weird."
"Um... d'you want to get a coffee?" said Cho tentatively, as the rain began to fall more heavily.
"Yeah, all right," said Harry, looking around. "Where?"
"Oh, there's a really nice place just up here; haven't you ever been to Madam Puddifoot's?" she
"Cute, isn't it?" said Cho happily.
"Er... yeah," said Harry untruthfully.
"Look, she's decorated it for Valentine's Day!" said Cho, indicating a number of golden cherubs
"Aaah..."
"What can I get you, m'dears?" said Madam Puddifoot, a very stout woman with a shiny black
"Two coffees, please," said Cho.
"Er... listen, d'you want to come with me to the Three Broomsticks at lunchtime? I'm meeting
Hermione Granger there."
"You're meeting Hermione Granger? Today?"
"Yeah. Well, she asked me to, so I thought I would. D'you want to come with me? She said it
wouldn't matter if you did."
"Oh... well... that was nice of her."
"He asked me out, you know," she said in a quiet voice. "A couple of weeks ago. Roger. I turned
him down, though."
"I came in here with Cedric last year," said Cho.
"I've been meaning to ask you for ages... did Cedric - did he - m - m - mention me at all before
he died?"
"Well - no -" he said quietly. "There - there wasn't time for him to say anything. Erm... so...
d'you... d'you get to see a lot of Quidditch in the holidays? You support the Tornados, right?"
"Look," he said desperately, leaning in so that nob ody else could overhear, "let's not talk about
Cedric right now... let's talk about something else."
"I thought," she said, tears spattering down on to the table, "I thought you'd u - u - understand!
didn't you?"
"Well - I have talked about it," Harry said in a whisper, "to Ron and Hermione, but -"
"Oh, you'll talk to Hermione Granger!" she said shrilly, her face now shining with tears. Several
more kissing couples broke apart to stare. "But you won't talk to me! P - perhaps it would be best if we just... just p - paid and you went and met up with Hermione G - Granger, like you
obviously want to!"
"Cho?" he said weakly, wishing Roger would seize his girlfriend and start kissing her again to
"Go on, leave!" she said, now crying into the napkin. "I don't know why you asked me out in the
are you meeting after Hermione?"
"It's not like that!" said Harry, and he was so relieved at finally understanding what she was
"I'll see you around, Harry" she said dramatically, and hiccoughing slightly she dashed to the
"Cho!" Harry called after her, but the door had already swung shut behind her with a tuneful
"Women!" he muttered angrily, sloshing down the rain-washed street with his hands in his
pockets. "What did she want to talk about Cedric for, anyway? Why does she always want to
drag up a subject that makes her act like a human hosepipe?"
"Hi, Hagrid!" he said, when he had squeezed through the crammed tables and pulled up a chair
"Oh, it's yeh, Harry," said Hagrid. "Yeh all right?"
"Yeah, I'm fine," lied Harry; but, next to this battered and mournful-looking Hagrid, he felt he
didn't really have much to complain about. "Er - are you okay?"
"Me?" said Hagrid. "Oh yeah, I'm grand, Harry, grand."
Hagrid said abruptly, "In the same boat, yeh an' me, aren' we, 'Arry?"
"Er -" said Harry.
"Yeah... I've said it before... both outsiders, like," said Hagrid, nodding wisely. "An' both
orphans. Yeah... both orphans."
"Makes a diff'rence, havin' a decent family," he said. "Me dad was decent. An' your mum an'
dad were decent. If they'd lived, life woulda bin diff'rent, eh?"
"Yeah... I s'pose," said Harry cautiously. Hagrid seemed to be in a very strange mood.
"Family," said Hagrid gloomily. "Whatever yeh say, blood's important..."
"Hagrid," said Harry, unable to stop himself, "where are you getting all these injuries?"
"Eh?" said Hagrid, looking startled. "Wha' injuries?"
"All those!" said Harry, pointing at Hagrid's face.
"Oh... tha's jus' normal bumps an' bruises, Harry," said Hagrid dismissively, "I got a rough job."
"I'll be seein' yeh, Harry... take care now."
"Harry! Harry, over here!"
"You're early!" said Hermione, moving along to give him room to sit down. "I thought you were
with Cho, I wasn't expecting you for another hour at least!"
"Cho?" said Rita at once, twisting round in her seat to stare avidly at Harry. "A girl?"
"It's none of your business if Harry's been with a h undred girls," Hermione told Rita coolly. "So you can put that away right now."
"What are you up to?" Harry asked, sitting down and staring from Rita to Luna to Hermione.
"Little Miss Perfect was just about to tell me when you arrived," said Rita, taking a large slurp of
her drink. "I suppose I'm allowed to talk to him, am I?" she shot at Hermione.
"Yes, I suppose you are," said Hermione coldly.
of her drink and said out of the corner of her mouth, "Pretty girl, is she, Harry?"
"One more word about Harry's love life and the deal's off and that's a promise," said Hermione
"What deal?" said Rita, wiping her mouth on the back of her hand. "You haven't mentioned a
deal yet, Miss Prissy, you just told me to turn up. Oh, one of these days..." She took a deep
"Yes, yes, one of these days you'll write more horrible stories about Harry and me," said
Hermione indifferently. "Find someone who cares, why don't you?"
"They've run plenty of horrible stories about Harry this year without my help," said Rita,
shooting a sideways look at him over the top of her glass and adding in a rough whisper, "How
has that made you feel, Harry? Betrayed? Distraught? Misunderstood?"
"He feels angry, of course," said Hermione in a hard, clear voice. "Because he's told the Minister
for Magic the truth and the Minister's too much of an idiot to believe him."
"So you actually stick to it, do you, that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back?" said Rita,
the clasp of the crocodile bag. "You stand by all this garbage Dumbledore's been telling
everybody about You-Know-Who returning and you being the sole witness?"
"I wasn't the sole witness," snarled Harry. "There were a dozen-odd Death Eaters there as well.
Want their names?"
"I'd love them," breathed Rita, now fumbling in her bag once more and gazing at him as though
he was the most beautiful thing she had ever seen. "A great bold headline: 'PotterAccuses... ' A
community of being Death Eaters... '"
"But of course," she said, lowering the quill and looking daggers at Hermione, "Little Miss
Perfect wouldn't want that story out there, would she?"
"As a matter of fact," said Hermione sweetly, "that's exactly what Little Miss Perfect does want."
"You want me to report what he says about He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named?"Rita asked Hermione in a hushed voice.
"Yes, I do," said Hermione. "The true story. All the facts. Exactly as Harry reports them. He'll
he'll tell you what Voldemort looks like now - oh, get a grip on yourself," she added
"The Prophet wouldn't print it. In case you haven't noticed, nobody believes his cock-and-bull
story. Everyone thinks he's delusional. Now, if you let me write the story from that angle -"
"We don't need another story about how Harry's lost his marbles!" said Hermione angrily.
"We've had plenty of those already, thank you! I want him given the opportunity to tell the truth!"
"There's no market for a story like that," said Rita coldly.
"You mean the Prophet won't print it because Fudge won't let them," said Hermione irritably.
said in a businesslike tone, "All right, Fudge is leaning on the Prophet, but it comes to the same
People just don't want to believe You-Know-Whos back."
"So the Daily Prophet exists to tell people what they want to hear, does it?" said Hermione
"The Prophet exists to sell itself, you silly girl," she said coldly.
"My dad thinks it's an awful paper," said Luna, chipping into the conversation unexpectedly.
eyes. "He publishes important stories he thinks the public needs to know. He doesn't care about
making money."
"I'm guessing your father runs some stupid little village newsletter?" she said. "Probably, Twenty- Five Ways to Mingle With Muggles and the dates of the next Bring and Fly Sale?"
"No," said Luna, dipping her onion back into her Gillywater, "he's the editor of The Quibbler."
"'Important stories he thinks the public needs to know', eh? " she said witheringly. "I could manure my garden with the contents of that rag."
"Well, this is your chance to raise the tone of it a bit, isn't it?" said Hermione pleasantly. "Luna
says her father's quite happy to take Harry's interview. That's who'll be publishing it."
"The Quibbler!" she said, cackling. "You think people will take him seriously if he's published
in The Quibbler!"
"Some people won't," said Hermione in a level voice. "But the Daily Prophet's version of the
even if it is published in a -" she glanced sideways at Luna, "in a - well, an unusual magazine - I
think they might be rather keen to read it."
"All right, let's say for a moment I'll do it," she said abruptly. "What kind of fee am I going to
get?"
"I don't think Daddy exactly pays people to write f or the magazine," said Luna dreamily. "They
do it because it's an honor and, of course, to see their names in print."
"I'm supposed to do this for free?"
"Well, yes," said Hermione calmly, taking a sip of her drink. "Otherwise, as you very well know,
give you rather a lot for an insider's account of life in Azkaban."
"I don't suppose I've got any choice, have I?" said Rita, her voice shaking slightly. She opened
"Daddy will be pleased," said Luna brightly. A muscle twitched in Rita's jaw.
"Okay, Harry?" said Hermione, turning to him. "Ready to tell the public the truth?"
"I suppose," said Harry, watching Rita balancing the Quick-Quotes Quill at the ready on the
"Fire away, then, Rita," said Hermione serenely, fishing a cherry out from the bottom of her
in The Quibbler, that her father was expecting a "'lovely long article on recent sightings of
Crumple-Horned Snorkacks,'"- "and of course, that'll be a very important story, so Harrys might
have to wait for the following issue," said Luna.
"Can't wait to see what Umbridge thinks of you going public," said Dean, sounding awestruck at
"It's the right thing to do, Harry," said Neville, who was sitting opposite him. He was rather pale, but went on in a low voice, "It must have been... tough... talking about it... was it?"
"Yeah," mumbled Harry, "but people have got to know what Voldemorts capable of, haven't
they?"
"That's right," said Neville, nodding, "and his Death Eaters, too... people should know..."
"Oh, I forgot to ask you," said Hermione brightly, glancing over at the Ravenclaw table, "what
happened on your date with Cho? How come you were back so early?"
"Er... well, it was..." said Harry, pulling a dish of rhubarb crumble towards him and helping
himself to seconds, "a complete fiasco, now you mention it."
"... so then," he finished several minutes later, as the final bit of crumble disappeared, "she jumps up, right, and says, 'I'll see you around, Harry,' an d runs out of the place!" He put down his spoon and looked at Hermione. "I mean, what was all that about? What was going on?"
"Oh, Harry" she said sadly. "Well, I'm sorry, but you were a bit tactless."
"Me, tactless?" said Harry, outraged. "One minute we were getting on fine, next minute she was
teashop - how was I supposed to feel about that?"
"Well, you see," said Hermione, with the patient air of someone explaining that one plus one
equals two to an over-emotional toddler, "you shouldn't have told her that you wanted to meet
me halfway through your date."
"But, but," spluttered Harry, "but - you told me to meet you at twelve and to bring her along, how was I supposed to do that without telling her?"
"You should have told her differently," said Hermione, still with that maddeningly patient air.
"You should have said it was really annoying, but I'd made you promise to come along to the
have been a good idea to mention how ugly you think I am, too," Hermione added as an
"But I don't think you're ugly," said Harry, bemused.
"Harry you're worse than Ron... well, no, you're not, " she sighed, as Ron himself came
stumping into the Hall splattered with mud and looking grumpy. "Look - you upset Cho when
find out how much you liked her."
"Is that what she was doing?" said Harry, as Ron dropped on to the bench opposite them and
pulled every dish within reach towards him. "Well, wouldn't it have been easier if she'd just
asked me whether I liked her better than you?"
"Girls don't often ask questions like that," said Hermione.
"Well, they should!" said Harry forcefully. "Then I could've just told her I fancy her, and she
wouldn't have had to get herself all worked up again about Cedric dying!"
"I'm not saying what she did was sensible," said Hermione, as Ginny joined them, just as muddy as Ron and looking equally disgruntled. "I'm just trying to make you see how she was feeling at the time."
"You should write a book," Ron told Hermione as he cut up his potatoes, "translating mad things
girls do so boys can understand them."
"Yeah," said Harry fervently, looking over at the Ravenclaw table. Cho had just got up, and, still
Ginny. "So, how was Quidditch practice?"
"It was a nightmare," said Ron in a surly voice.
"Oh come on," said Hermione, looking at Ginny, "I'm sure it wasn't that -"
"Yes, it was," said Ginny. "It was appalling. Angelina was nearly in tears by the end of it."
"Ron and Ginny not here?" asked Fred, looking around as he pulled up a chair, and when Harry
shook his head, he said, "Good. We were watching their practice. They're going to be
slaughtered. They're complete rubbish without us."
"Come on, Ginny's not bad," said George fairly, sitting down next to Fred. "Actually, I dunno
how she got so good, seeing how we never let her play with us."
"She's been breaking into your broom shed in the garden since the age of six and taking each of
your brooms out in turn when you weren't looking," said Hermione from behind her tottering
"Oh," said George, looking mildly impressed. "Well - that'd explain it."
"Has Ron saved a goal yet?" asked Hermione, peering over the top of Magical Hieroglyphs and
"Well, he can do it if he doesn't think anyone's watching him," said Fred, rolling his eyes. "So all we have to do is ask the crowd to turn their backs and talk among themselves every time the
Quaffle goes up his end on Saturday."
"You know, Quidditch was about the only thing in this place worth staying for."
"You've got exams coming!"
"Told you already, we're not fussed about NEWTs," said Fred. "The Snackboxes are ready to
them, Lee put us on to it."
"I dunno if I even want to watch this match. If Zacharias Smith beats us I might have to kill
myself."
"Kill him, more like," said Fred firmly.
"That's the trouble with Quidditch," said Hermione absent-mindedly, once again bent over her
Runes translation, "it creates all this bad feeling and tension between the houses."
"Well, it does!" she said impatiently. "It's only a game, isn't it?"
"Hermione," said Harry, shaking his head, "you're good on feelings and stuff, but you just don't
understand about Quidditch."
"Maybe not," she said darkly, returning to her translation, "but at least my happiness doesn't
depend on Ron's goalkeeping ability."
"Good catch," Harry told Ginny back in the common room, where the atmosphere resembled that
"I was lucky," she shrugged. "It wasn't a very fast Snitch and Summerby's got a cold, he sneezed and closed his eyes at exactly the wrong moment. Anyway, once you're back on the team -"
"Ginny, I've got a lifelong ban."
"You're banned as long as Umbridge is in the school," Ginny corrected him. "There's a difference. Anyway, once you're back, I think I'll try out for Chaser. Angelina and Alicia are both leaving next year and I prefer goal-scoring to Seeking anyway."
"Angelina still won't let him resign," Ginny said, as though reading Harry's mind. "She says she
knows he's got it in him."
"I haven't even got the heart to take the mickey out of him," said Fred, looking over at Ron's
crumpled figure. "Mind you... when he missed the fourteenth -"
"- well, I'll save it for parties, eh?"
"Who're you after?" he asked it, languidly removing his orange juice from underneath its beak
"What's going on?" Ron asked in amazement, as the whole of Gryffindor table leaned forwards
"Harry!" said Hermione breathlessly, plunging her hands into the feathery mass and pulling out a
screech owl bearing a long, cylindrical package. "I think I know what this means - open this one
first!"
"It's good, isn't it?" said Luna, who had drifted o ver to the Gryffindor table and now squeezed
herself on to the bench between Fred and Ron. "It came out yesterday, I asked Dad to send you a
free copy. I expect all these," she waved a hand at the assembled owls still scrabbling around on
the table in front of Harry, "are letters from readers."
"That's what I thought," said Hermione eagerly. "Harry, d'you mind if we -?"
"Help yourself," said Harry, feeling slightly bemused.
"This one's from a bloke who thinks you're off your rocker," said Ron, glancing down his letter.
"Ah well..."
"This woman recommends you try a good course of Shock Spells at St. Mungo's," said Hermione, looking disappointed and crumpling up a second.
"This one looks okay, though," said Harry slowly, scanning a long letter from a witch in Paisley.
"Hey, she says she believes me!"
"This one's in two minds," said Fred, who had joined in the letter-opening with enthusiasm.
"Says you don't come across as a mad person, but he really doesn't want to believe You-Know-
Who's back so he doesn't know what to think now. Blimey, what a waste of parchment."
"Here's another one you've convinced, Harry!" said Hermione excitedly. "Having read your side
little though I want to think that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named has returned, I am forced to accept that you are telling the truth... Oh, this is wonderful!"
"Another one who thinks you're barking," said Ron, throwing a crumpled letter over his shoulder
"... but this one says you've got her converted and she now thinks you're a real hero - she's put
in a photograph, too - wow!"
"What is going on here?" said a falsely sweet, girlish voice.
"Why have you got all these letters, Mr. Potter?" she asked slowly.
"Is that a crime now?" said Fred loudly. "Getting mail?"
"Be careful, Mr. Weasley, or I shall have to put you in detention," said Umbridge. "Well, Mr.
Potter?"
"People have written to me because I gave an interview," said Harry. "About what happened to
me last June."
"An interview?" repeated Umbridge, her voice thinner and higher than ever. "What do you
mean?"
"I mean a reporter asked me questions and I answered them," said Harry. "Here -"
"When did you do this?" she asked, her voice trembling slightly.
"Last Hogsmeade weekend," said Harry.
"There will be no more Hogsmeade trips for you, Mr. Potter," she whispered. "How you dare...
how you could..." She took a deep breath. "I have tried again and again to teach you not to tell
week's worth of detentions."
"What exactly are you so happy about?" Harry asked her.
"Oh, Harry, don't you see?" Hermione breathed. "If she could have done one thing to make
it!"
she nipped in there before Ancient Runes. "Then they spotted me, and obviously they know I
know you, so they bombarded me with questions," Hermione told Harry, her eyes shining, "and
Harry, I think they believe you, I really do, I think you've finally got them convinced!"
said, "Shh!" and hurried away; and Professor Trelawney broke into hysterical sobs during
was breathing in his ear, "I'm really, really sorry. That interview was so brave... it made me cry."
"I just wanted to say," he mumbled, squinting at Harry's left knee, "I believe you. And I've sent a copy of that magazine to me mam."
"And the best bit," whispered Hermione gleefully, as they left the library, "is they can't contradict you, because they can't admit they've read the article!"
"Dad's reprinting!" she told Harry, her eyes popping excitedly. "He can't believe it, he says
people seem even more interested in this than the Crumple-Horned Snorkacks!"
"I have been badly advised, it seems," said Harry, in a high, cold voice that pulsed with anger.
"Master, I crave your pardon," croaked the man kneeling on the floor. The back of his head
"I do not blame you, Rookwood," said Harry in that cold, cruel voice.
"You are sure of your facts, Rookwood?" asked Harry.
"Yes, My Lord, yes... I used to work in the Department after - after all..."
"Avery told me Bode would be able to remove it."
"Bode could never have taken it, Master... Bode would have known he could not... undoubtedly, that is why he fought so hard against Malfoy's Imperius Curse..."
"Stand up, Rookwood," whispered Harry.
"You have done well to tell me this," said Harry. "Very well... I have wasted months on fruitless
gratitude, Rookwood..."
"My Lord... yes, My Lord," gasped Rookwood, his voice hoarse with relief.
"I shall need your help. I shall need all the information you can give me."
"Of course, My Lord, of course... anything..."
"Very well... you may go. Send Avery to me."
"NOOOOOOOOO!"
"What?" yelled a voice nearby.
"Will you stop acting like a maniac so I can get you out of here!"
"Has someone been attacked again?" asked Ron, pulling Harry roughly to his feet. "Is it Dad? Is it that snake?"
"No - everyone's fine -" gasped Harry, whose forehead felt as though it were on fire. "Well...
Avery isn't... he's in trouble... he gave him the wrong information... Voldemort's really angry"
"But Rookwood's going to help him now... he's on the right track again..."
"What are you talking about?" said Ron, sounding scared. "D'you mean... did you just see You-
Know-Who?"
"I was You-Know-Who," said Harry, and he stretched out his hands in the darkness and held
them up to his face, to check that they were no longer deathly white and long-fingered. "He was
with Rookwood, he's one of the Death Eaters who escaped from Azkaban, remember? Rookwood's just told him Bode couldn't have done it."
"Done what?"
"Remove something... he said Bode would have known he couldn't have done it... Bode was
under the Imperius Curse... I think he said Malfoy's dad put it on him."
"Bode was bewitched to remove something?" Ron said. "But -Harry, that's got to be -"
"The weapon," Harry finished the sentence for him. "I know"
"Did you say," murmured Ron, putting his head close to Harry's on the pretence of helping
himself to water from the jug on his bedside table, "that you were You-Know-Who?"
"Yeah," said Harry quietly.
"Harry," he said, as Dean and Seamus clattered around noisily, pulling off their robes and talking, "you've got to tell -"
"I haven't got to tell anyone," said Harry shortly. "I wouldn't have seen it at all if I could do
Occlumency. I'm supposed to have learned to shut this stuff out. That's what they want."
"So that's why they killed him," she said quietly, withdrawing her gaze from Fred and George at
last. "When Bode tried to steal this weapon, something funny happened to him. I think there must be defensive spells on it, or around it, to stop people touching it. That's why he was in St.
to put the curse on him. Never out of the Ministry, is he?"
"He was even hanging around that day I had my hearing," said Harry. "In the - hang on..." he
said slowly. "He was in the Department of Mysteries corridor that day! Your dad said he was
probably trying to sneak down and find out what happened in my hearing, but what if -"
"Sturgis!" gasped Hermione, looking thunderstruck.
"Sorry?" said Ron, looking bewildered.
"Sturgis Podmore -" said Hermione breathlessly, "arrested for trying to get through a door!
for Voldemort - Ron, be quiet - but he got caught and sent to Azkaban..."
"And now Rookwood's told Voldemort how to get the weapon?"
"I didn't hear all the conversation, but that's what it sounded like," said Harry. "Rookwood used
to work there... maybe Voldemort'll send Rookwood to do it?"
Hermione nodded, apparently still lost in thought. Then, quite abruptly, she said, "But you shouldn't have seen this at all, Harry."
"What?" he said, taken aback.
"You're supposed to be learning how to close your m ind to this sort of thing," said Hermione,
"I know I am," said Harry. "But -"
"Well, I think we should just try and forget what you saw," said Hermione firmly. "And you
ought to put in a bit more effort on your Occlumency from now on."
"Get up, Potter."
"That last memory," said Snape. "What was it?"
"I don't know," said Harry, getting wearily to his feet. He was finding it increasingly difficult to
"You mean the one where my cousin tried to make me stand in the toilet?"
"No," said Snape softly. "I mean the one with a man kneeling in the middle of a darkened
room..."
"It's... nothing," said Harry.
"How do that man and that room come to be inside your head, Potter?" said Snape.
"It -" said Harry, looking everywhere but at Snape, "it was -just a dream I had."
"A dream?" repeated Snape.
"You do know why we are here, don't you, Potter?" said Snape, in a low, dangerous voice. "You
do know why I am giving up my evenings to this tedious job?"
"Yes," said Harry stiffly.
"Remind me why we are here, Potter."
"So I can learn Occlumency," said Harry, now glaring at a dead eel.
"Correct, Potter. And dim though you may be -" Harry looked back at Snape, hating him "- I
How many other dreams about the Dark Lord have you had?"
"Just that one," lied Harry.
"Perhaps," said Snape, his dark, cold eyes narrowin g slightly, "perhaps you actually enjoy having these visions and dreams, Potter. Maybe they make you feel special - important?"
"No, they don't," said Harry, his jaw set and his fingers clenched tightly around the handle of his
"That is just as well, Potter," said Snape coldly, "because you are neither special nor important,
and it is not up to you to find out what the Dark Lord is saying to his Death Eaters."
"No - that's your job, isn't it?" Harry shot at him.
"Yes, Potter," he said, his eyes glinting. "That is my job. Now, if you are ready, we will start
again."
He raised his wand: "One -- two - three -Legilimens!"
"Protego!"
"ENOUGH!"
"Reparo," hissed Snape, and the jar sealed itself at once. "Well, Potter... that was certainly an
improvement..." Panting slightly, Snape straightened the Pensieve in which he had again stored
there. "I don't remember telling you to use a Shield Charm... but there is no doubt that it was
effective..."
"Let's try again, shall we?" said Snape.
"On the count of three, then," said Snape, raising his wand once more. "One - two -"
cried, "Legilimens!"
"POTTER!"
"Explain yourself!" said Snape, who was standing over him, looking furious.
"I... dunno what happened," said Harry truthfully, st anding up. There was a lump on the back of
his head from where he had hit the ground and he felt feverish. "I've never seen that before. I
mean, I told you, I've dreamed about the door... but it's never opened before"
"You are not working hard enough!"
"You are lazy and sloppy, Potter, it is small wonder that the Dark Lord -"
"Can you tell me something, sir?" said Harry, firing up again. "Why do you call Voldemort the
Dark Lord? I've only ever heard Death Eaters call him that."
"What the -?" he muttered.
"Did you see anything unusual on your way down here, Potter?"
"No!" she shrieked. "NO! This cannot be happening... it cannot... I refuse to accept it!"
"You didn't realize this was coming?" said a high girlish voice, sounding callously amused, and
Professor Umbridge. "Incapable though you are of predicting even tomorrow's weather, you
improvement, would make it inevitable that you would be sacked?"
"You c - can't!" howled Professor Trelawney, tears streaming down her face from behind her
enormous lenses, "you c - can't sack me! I've b - been here sixteen years! H - Hogwarts is in -
my h - home!"
"It was your home," said Professor Umbridge, and Harry was revolted to see the enjoyment
to one of her trunks, "until an hour ago, when the Minister of Magic countersigned your Order
of Dismissal. Now kindly remove yourself from this Hall. You are embarrassing us."
"There, there, Sibyll... calm down... blow your nose on this... it's not as bad as you think,
now... you are not going to have to leave Hogwarts..."
"Oh really, Professor McGonagall?" said Umbridge in a deadly voice, taking a few steps forward. "And your authority for that statement is...?"
"That would be mine," said a deep voice.
"Yours, Professor Dumbledore?" said Umbridge, with a singularly unpleasant little laugh. "I'm
afraid you do not understand the position. I have here -" she pulled a parchment scroll from
within her robes "-an Order of Dismissal signed by myself and the Minister for Magic. Under the
Trelawney is not up to scratch. I have dismissed her."
Trelawney, who was still sobbing and choking on her trunk, and said, "You are quite right, of
You do not, however, have the authority to send them away from the castle. I am afraid," he went on, with a courteous little bow, "that the power to do that still resides with the Headmaster, and it is my wish that Professor Trelawney continue to live at Hogwarts."
"No - no, I'll g - go, Dumbledore! I sh - shall - leave Hogwarts and s - seek my fortune elsewhere -"
"No," said Dumbledore sharply. "It is my wish that you remain, Sibyll."
"Might I ask you to escort Sibyll back upstairs, Professor McGonagall?"
"Of course," said McGonagall. "Up you get, Sibyll..."
went scurrying after them, his wand held out before him; he squeaked "Locomotor trunks!" and
"And what," she said, in a whisper that carried all around the Entrance Hall, "are you going to do
with her once I appoint a new Divination teacher who needs her lodgings?"
"Oh, that won't be a problem," said Dumbledore pleasantly. "You see, I have already found us a
new Divination teacher, and he will prefer lodgings on the ground floor."
"You've found -?" said Umbridge shrilly. "You've found? Might I remind you, Dumbledore, that under Educational Decree Number Twenty-two -"
"The Ministry has the right to appoint a suitable candidate if -and only if- the Headmaster is
unable to find one," said Dumbledore. "And I am happy to say that on this occasion I have
succeeded. May I introduce you?"
"This is Firenze," said Dumbledore happily to a thunderstruck Umbridge. "I think you'll find him suitable."
"I'll bet you wish you hadn't given up Divination now, don't you, Hermione?" asked Parvati,
"Not really" said Hermione indifferently, who was reading the Daily Prophet. "I've never really
liked horses."
"He's not a horse, he's a centaur!" said Lavender, sounding shocked.
"A gorgeous centaur..." sighed Parvati.
"Either way, he's still got four legs," said Hermione coolly. "Anyway I thought you two were all
upset that Trelawney had gone?"
"We are!" Lavender assured her. "We went up to her office to see her; we took her some daffodils - not the honking ones that Sprout's got, nice ones."
"How is she?" asked Harry.
"Not very good, poor thing," said Lavender sympathetically. "She was crying and saying she'd
Umbridge was horrible to her, wasn't she?"
"I've got a feeling Umbridge has only just started being horrible," said Hermione darkly.
"Impossible," said Ron, who was tucking into a large plate of eggs and bacon. "She can't get any worse than she's been already."
"You mark my words, she's going to want revenge on Dumbledore for appointing a new teacher
without consulting her," said Hermione, closing the newspaper. "Especially another part-human.
You saw the look on her face when she saw Firenze."
"Aren't we going up to North Tower?" asked Ron, looking puzzled, as Parvati bypassed the
"How d'you expect Firenze to climb that ladder? We're in classroom eleven now, it was on the
noticeboard yesterday."
"What the -?"
"Harry Potter," he said, holding out a hand when Harry entered.
"Er - hi," said Harry, shaking hands with the centaur, who surveyed him unblinkingly through
those astonishingly blue eyes but did not smile. "Er - good to see you."
"And you," said the centaur, inclining his white-blond head. "It was foretold that we would meet
again."
"Professor Dumbledore has kindly arranged this classroom for us," said Firenze, when everyone
had settled down, "in imitation of my natural habitat. I would have preferred to teach you in the
Forbidden Forest, which was - until Monday - my home... but that is no longer possible."
"Please - er - sir -" said Parvati breathlessly, raising her hand, "- why not? We've been in there
with Hagrid, we're not frightened!"
"It is not a question of your bravery," said Firenze, "but of my position. I cannot return to the
Forest. My herd has banished me."
"Herd?" said Lavender in a confused voice, and Harry knew she was thinking of cows. "What -
oh!" Comprehension dawned on her face. "There are more o f you!" she said, stunned.
"Did Hagrid breed you, like the Thestrals?" asked Dean eagerly.
"I didn't - I meant - sorry" he finished in a hushed voice.
"Centaurs are not the servants or playthings of humans," said Firenze quietly. There was a pause,
"Please, sir... why have the other centaurs banished you?"
"Because I have agreed to work for Professor Dumbledore," said Firenze. "They see this as a
betrayal of our kind."
"Let us begin," said Firenze. He swished his long palomino tail, raised his hand towards the leafy canopy overhead, then lowered it slowly, and as he did so, the light in the room dimmed, so that they now seemed to be sitting in a forest clearing by twilight, and stars appeared on the ceiling.
There were oohs and gasps and Ron said audibly, "Blimey!"
"Lie back on the floor," said Firenze in his calm voice, "and observe the heavens. Here is written, for those who can see, the fortune of our races."
"I know that you have learned the names of the planets and their moons in Astronomy," said
Firenze's calm voice, "and that you have mapped the stars progress through the heavens.
that the future may be glimpsed in the sky above us -"
"Professor Trelawney did astrology with us!" said Parvati excitedly, raising her hand in front of
her so that it stuck up in the air as she lay on her back. "Mars causes accidents and burns and
things like that, and when it makes an angle to Saturn, like now -" she drew a right-angle in the
air above her "- that means people need to be extra careful when handling hot things -"
"That," said Firenze calmly, "is human nonsense."
"Trivial hurts, tiny human accidents," said Firenze, as his hooves thudded over the mossy floor.
"These are of no more significance than the scurryings of ants to the wide universe, and are
unaffected by planetary movements."
"Professor Trelawney -" began Parvati, in a hurt and indignant voice.
"- is a human," said Firenze simply. "And is therefore blinkered and fettered by the limitations of
your kind."
"Sibyll Trelawney may have Seen, I do not know," continued Firenze, and Harry heard the
swishing of his tail again as he walked up and down before them, "but she wastes her time, in the
are seeing."
"In the past decade, the indications have been that wizardkind is living through nothing more
burning of certain herbs and leaves, by the observation of fume and flame..."
"He's not very definite on anything, is he?" said Ron in a low voice, as they put out their
mallowsweet fire. "I mean, I could do with a few more details about this war we're about to
have, couldn't you?"
Harry and Ron were on the point of following them when Firenze called, "Harry Potter, a word,
please."
"You may stay," Firenze told him. "But close the door, please." Ron hastened to obey.
"Harry Potter, you are a friend of Hagrid's, are you not?" said the centaur.
"Yes," said Harry.
"Then give him a warning from me. His attempt is not working. He would do better to abandon
it."
"His attempt is not working?" Harry repeated blankly.
"And he would do better to abandon it," said Firenze, nodding. "I would warn Hagrid myself, but
enough, without a centaurs' battle."
"But - what's Hagrid attempting to do?" said Harry nervously.
"Hagrid has recently rendered me a great service," said Firenze, "and he has long since earned my respect for the care he shows all living creatures. I shall not betray his secret. But he must be
brought to his senses. The attempt is not working. Tell him, Harry Potter. Good-day to you."
"Nice bloke, Firenze," he said gruffly, "but he don' know what he's talkin' abou' on this. The
attemp's comin' on fine."
"Hagrid, what're you up to?" asked Harry seriously. "Because you've got to be careful, Umbridge has already sacked Trelawney and, if you ask me, she's on a roll. If you're doing anything you shouldn't be, you'll be -"
"There's things more importan' than keepin' a job," said Hagrid, though his hands shook slightly
as he said this and a basin full of Knarl droppings crashed to the floor. "Don' worry abou' me,
Harry jus' get along now, there's a good lad."
"Oh, don't be such a killjoy," said Cho brightly, watching her silvery swan-shaped Patronus soar
around the Room of Requirement during their last lesson before Easter. "They're so pretty!"
"They're not supposed to be pretty, they're supposed to protect you," said Harry patiently. "What we really need is a Boggart or something; that's how I learned, I had to conjure a Patronus while the Boggart was pretending to be a Dementor -"
"But that would be really scary!" said Lavender, who was shooting puffs of silver vapour out of
the end of her wand. "And I still -can't - do it!" she added angrily.
"You've got to think of something happy," Harry reminded him.
"I'm trying," said Neville miserably, who was trying so hard his round face was actually shining
"Harry, I think I'm doing it"' yelled Seamus, who had been brought along to his first ever D.A.
meeting by Dean. "Look - ah -it's gone... but it was definitely something hairy, Harry!"
"They are sort of nice, aren't they?" she said, looking at it fondly.
"Hi, Dobby!" he said. "What are you - What's wrong?"
"Harry Potter, sir..." squeaked the elf, trembling from head to foot, "Harry Potter, sir... Dobby
has come to warn you... but the house-elves have been warned not to tell..."
"What's happened, Dobby?" Harry asked, grabbing the elf's tiny arm and holding him away from anything with which he might seek to hurt himself.
"Harry Potter... she... she..."
"Who's 'she', Dobby?"
"Umbridge?" asked Harry, horrified.
"What about her? Dobby - she hasn't found out about this - about us - about the D.A.?"
"Is she coming?" Harry asked quietly.
"Yes, Harry Potter, yes!"
"WHAT ARE YOU WAITING FOR?" Harry bellowed. "RUN!"
"Harry, come on!" shrieked Hermione from the center of the knot of people now fighting to get
"Dobby - this is an order - get back down to the kitchen with the other elves and, if she asks you
whether you warned me, lie and say no!" said Harry. "And I forbid you to hurt yourself!" he
"Thank you, Harry Potter!" squeaked Dobby, and he streaked off. Harry glanced left and right,
"AAARGH!"
"Trip Jinx, Potter!" he said. "Hey Professor - PROFESSOR! I've got one!"
"It's him!" she said jubilantly at the sight of Harry on the floor. "Excellent, Draco, excellent, oh,
very good - fifty points to Slytherin! I'll take him from here... stand up, Potter!"
"You hop along and see if you can round up any more of them, Draco," she said. "Tell the others
girls' ones - off you go - and you," she added in her softest, most dangerous voice, as Malfoy
walked away, "you can come with me to the Headmasters office, Potter."
"Fizzing Whizzbee," sang Umbridge; the stone gargoyle jumped aside, the wall behind split
"Well," he said. "Well, well, well..."
"He was heading back to Gryffindor Tower," said Umbridge. There was an indecent excitement
dissolving with misery in the Entrance Hall. "The Malfoy boy cornered him."
"Did he, did he?" said Fudge appreciatively. "I must remember to tell Lucius. Well, Potter... I
expect you know why you are here?"
"Ye--no."
"I beg your pardon?" said Fudge.
"No," said Harry, firmly.
"You don't know why you are here?"
"No, I don't," said Harry.
"So you have no idea," said Fudge, in a voice positively sagging with sarcasm, "why Professor
rules?"
"School rules?" said Harry. "No."
"Or Ministry Decrees?" amended Fudge angrily.
"Not that I'm aware of," said Harry blandly.
"So, it's news to you, is it," said Fudge, his voice now thick with anger, "that an illegal student
organization has been discovered within this school?"
"Yes, it is," said Harry, hoisting an unconvincing look of innocent surprise on to his face.
"I think, Minister," said Umbridge silkily from beside him, "we might make better progress if I
fetch our informant."
"Yes, yes, do," said Fudge, nodding, and he glanced maliciously at Dumbledore as Umbridge left the room. "There's nothing like a good witness, is t here, Dumbledore?"
"Nothing at all, Cornelius," said Dumbledore gravely, inclining his head.
"Don't be scared, dear, don't be frightened," said Professor Umbridge softly, patting her on the
back, "it's quite all right, now. You have done the right thing. The Minister is very pleased with
"Marietta's mother, Minister," she added, looking up at Fudge, "is Madam Edgecombe from the
Hogwarts fires, you know."
"Jolly good, jolly good!" said Fudge heartily. "Like mother, like daughter, eh? Well, come on,
now, dear, look up, don't be shy, let's hear what you've got to - galloping gargoyles!"
"Never mind the spots now, dear," said Umbridge impatiently, "just take your robes away from
your mouth and tell the Minister -"
"Oh, very well, you silly girl, I'll tell him," snapped Umbridge. She hitched her sickly smile back on to her face and said, "Well, Minister, Miss Edgecombe here came to my office shortly after dinner this evening and told me she had something she wanted to tell me. She said that if I
that there was to be some kind of meeting there. Unfortunately, at that point this hex," she waved
impatiently at Marietta's concealed face, "came into operation and upon catching sight of her
face in my mirror the girl became too distressed to tell me any more."
"Well, now," said Fudge, fixing Marietta with what he evidently imagined was a kind and
fatherly look, "it is very brave of you, my dear, coming to tell Professor Umbridge. You did
purpose? Who was there?"
"Haven't we got a counter-jinx for this?" Fudge asked Umbridge impatiently, gesturing at
Marietta's face. "So she can speak freely?"
"I have not yet managed to find one," Umbridge admitted grudgingly, and Harry felt a surge of
pride in Hermione's jinxing ability. "But it doesn't matter if she won't speak, I can take up the
story from here."
"You will remember, Minister, that I sent you a report back in October that Potter had met a
number of fellow students in the Hog's Head in Hogsmeade -"
"And what is your evidence for that?" cut in Professor McGonagall.
"I have testimony from Willy Widdershins, Minerva, who happened to be in the bar at the time.
He was heavily bandaged, it is true, but his hearing was quite unimpaired," said Umbridge
smugly. "He heard every word Potter said and hastened straight to the school to report to me -"
"Oh, so that's why he wasn't prosecuted for setting up all those regurgitating toilets!" said
Professor McGonagall, raising her eyebrows. "What an interesting insight into our justice
system!"
"Blatant corruption!" roared the portrait of the corpulent, red-nosed wizard on the wall behind
Dumbledore's desk. "The Ministry did not cut deals with petty criminals in my day, no sir, they
did not!"
"Thank you, Fortescue, that will do," said Dumbledore softly.
"The purpose of Potter's meeting with these students," continued Professor Umbridge, "was to
has decided are inappropriate for school-age -"
"I think you'll find you're wrong there, Dolores," said Dumbledore quietly, peering at her over
"Oho!" said Fudge, bouncing up and down on the balls of his feet again. "Yes, do let's hear the
back to life and a couple of invisible Dementors?"
"Oh, very good, Minister, very good!"
"Cornelius, I do not deny - and nor, I am sure, does Harry - that he was in the Hog's Head that
Hog's Head."
"That's all very fine, Headmaster," she said, smiling sweetly, "but we are now nearly six months
not illegal, all those that have happened since most certainly are."
"Well," said Dumbledore, surveying her with polite interest over the top of his interlocked
fingers, "they certainly would be, if they had continued after the Decree came into effect. Do you have any evidence that any such meetings continued?"
"Evidence?" repeated Umbridge, with that horrible wide toad-like smile. "Have you not been
listening, Dumbledore? Why do you think Miss Edgecombe is here?"
"Oh, can she tell us about six months' worth of meetings?" said Dumbledore, raising his
eyebrows. "I was under the impression that she was merely reporting a meeting tonight."
"Miss Edgecombe," said Umbridge at once, "tell us how long these meetings have been going on, dear. You can simply nod or shake your head, I'm sure that won't make the spots worse. Have they been happening regularly over the last six months?"
"Just nod or shake your head, dear," Umbridge said coaxingly to Marietta, "come on, now, that
won't re-activate the jinx."
"I don't think you understood the question, did you, dear? I'm asking whether you've been going to these meetings for the past six months? You have, haven't you?"
"What do you mean by shaking your head, dear?" said Umbridge in a testy voice.
"I would have thought her meaning was quite clear," said Professor McGonagall harshly, "there
have been no secret meetings for the past six months. Is that correct, Miss Edgecombe?"
"But there was a meeting tonight!" said Umbridge furiously. "There was a meeting, Miss
he not, Potter organized it, Potter - why are you shaking your head, girl?"
"Well, usually when a person shakes their head," said McGonagall coldly, "they mean 'no'. So
unless Miss Edgecombe is using a form of sign-language as yet unknown to humans -"
"I cannot allow you to manhandle my students, Dolores," said Dumbledore and, for the first time, he looked angry.
"You want to calm yourself, Madam Umbridge," said Kingsley, in his deep, slow voice. "You
don't want to get yourself into trouble, now."
"No," said Umbridge breathlessly, glancing up at the towering figure of Kingsley. "I mean, yes -
you're right, Shacklebolt - I - I forgot myself."
"Dolores," said Fudge, with the air of trying to settle something once and for all, "the meeting
tonight - the one we know definitely happened -"
"Yes," said Umbridge, pulling herself together, "yes... well, Miss Edgecombe tipped me off and I proceeded at once to the seventh floor, accompanied by certain trustworthy students, so as to
provided."
"The moment I saw Potter's name on the list, I knew what we were dealing with," she said softly.
"Excellent," said Fudge, a smile spreading across his face, "excellent, Dolores. And... by
thunder..."
"See what they've named themselves?" said Fudge quietly. "Dumbledore's Army."
"Well, the game is up," he said simply. "Would you like a written confession from me, Cornelius
- or will a statement before these witnesses suffice?"
"Statement?" said Fudge slowly. "What - I don't -?"
"Dumbledore's Army, Cornelius," said Dumbledore, still smiling as he waved the list of names
before Fudge's face. "Not Potter's Army. Dumbledore's Army."
"But - but -"
"You?" he whispered, stamping again on his smouldering cloak.
"That's right," said Dumbledore pleasantly.
"You organized this?"
"I did," said Dumbledore.
"You recruited these students for - for your army?"
"Tonight was supposed to be the first meeting," said Dumbledore, nodding. "Merely to see
Edgecombe, of course."
"Then you have been plotting against me!" he yelled.
"That's right," said Dumbledore cheerfully.
"NO!" shouted Harry.
"No -- Professor Dumbledore -!"
"Be quiet, Harry, or I am afraid you will have to leave my office," said Dumbledore calmly.
"Yes, shut up, Potter!" barked Fudge, who was still ogling Dumbledore with a kind of horrified
delight. "Well, well, well - I came here tonight expecting to expel Potter and instead -"
"Instead you get to arrest me," said Dumbledore, smiling. "It's like losing a Knut and finding a
Galleon, isn't it?"
"Weasley!" cried Fudge, now positively quivering with delight, "Weasley, have you written it all
down, everything he's said, his confession, have you got it?"
"Yes, sir, I think so, sir!" said Percy eagerly, whose nose was splattered with ink from the speed
"The bit about how he's been trying to build up an army against the Ministry, how he's been
working to destabilize me?"
"Yes, sir, I've got it, yes!" said Percy, scanning his notes joyfully.
"Very well, then," said Fudge, now radiant with glee, "duplicate your notes, Weasley, and send a
copy to the Daily Prophet at once. If we send a fast owl we should make the morning edition!"
Dumbledore. "You will now be escorted back to the Ministry, where you will be formally
charged, then sent to Azkaban to await trial!"
"Ah," said Dumbledore gently, "yes. Yes, I thought we might hit that little snag."
"Snag?" said Fudge, his voice still vibrating with joy. "I see no snag, Dumbledore!"
"Well," said Dumbledore apologetically, "I'm afraid I do."
"Oh, really?"
"Well - it's just that you seem to be laboring under the delusion that I am going to - what is the
of time, and frankly, I can think of a whole host of things I would rather be doing."
"Don't be silly, Dawlish," said Dumbledore kindly. "I'm sure you are an excellent Auror - I seem to remember that you achieved 'Outstanding' in all your NEWT s -- but if you attempt to -- er -- bring me in by force, I will have to hurt you."
"So," sneered Fudge, recovering himself, "you intend to take on Dawlish, Shacklebolt, Dolores
and myself single-handed, do you, Dumbledore?"
"Merlin's beard, no," said Dumbledore, smiling, "not unless you are foolish enough to force me
to."
"He will not be single-handed!" said Professor McGonagall loudly, plunging her hand inside her
"Oh yes he will, Minerva!" said Dumbledore sharply. "Hogwarts needs you!"
"Enough of this rubbish!" said Fudge, pulling out his own wand. "Dawlish! Shacklebolt! Take
him!"
front of him; there was a shriek and a thud and somebody cried, "No!"; then there was the sound
"Are you all right?" Dumbledore asked.
"Yes!" said Professor McGonagall, getting up and dragging Harry and Marietta with her.
"Unfortunately, I had to hex Kingsley too, or it would have looked very suspicious," said
Dumbledore in a low voice. "He was remarkably quick on the uptake, modifying Miss
"Now, they will all awake very soon and it will be best if they do not know that we had time to
to the ground, they will not remember -"
"Where will you go, Dumbledore?" whispered Professor McGonagall. "Grimmauld Place?"
"Oh no," said Dumbledore, with a grim smile, "I am not leaving to go into hiding. Fudge will
soon wish he'd never dislodged me from Hogwarts, I promise you."
"Professor Dumbledore..." Harry began.
"Listen to me, Harry," he said urgently. "You must study Occlumency as hard as you can, do you understand me? Do everything Professor Snape tells you and practice it particularly every night before sleeping so that you can close your mind to bad dreams - you will understand why soon enough, but you must promise me -"
"Remember - close your mind -"
"- you will understand," whispered Dumbledore.
"Where is he?" yelled Fudge, pushing himself up from the floor. "Where is he?"
"I don't know!" shouted Kingsley, also leaping to his feet.
"Well, he can't have Disapparated!" cried Umbridge. "You can't do it from inside this school -"
"The stairs!" cried Dawlish, and he flung himself upon the door, wrenched it open and
"Well, Minerva," said Fudge nastily, straightening his torn shirtsleeve, "I'm afraid this is the end
of your friend Dumbledore."
"You think so, do you?" said Professor McGonagall scornfully.
"You'd better get those two off to bed," said Fudge, looking back at Professor McGonagall with a dismissive nod towards Harry and Marietta.
"You know, Minister, I disagree with Dumbledore on many counts... but you cannot deny he's
got style..."
"Dumbledore will be back before long," said Ernie Macmillan confidently on the way back from
Herbology, after listening intently to Harry's story. "They couldn't keep him away in our second
year and they won't be able to this time. The Fat Friar told me -" he dropped his voice
conspiratorially, so that Harry, Ron and Hermione had to lean closer to him to hear "- that
for him. Couldn't get past the gargoyle. The Head's office has sealed itself against her." Ernie
smirked. "Apparently, she had a right little tantrum."
"Oh, I expect she really fancied herself sitting up there in the Heads office," said Hermione
viciously, as they walked up the stone steps into the Entrance Hall. "Lording it over all the other
teachers, the stupid puffed-up, power-crazy old -"
"Now, do you really want to finish that sentence, Granger?"
"Afraid I'm going to have to dock a few points from Gryffindor and Hufflepuff," he drawled.
"It's only teachers who can dock points from houses, Malfoy," said Ernie at once.
"Yeah, we're prefects, too, remember?" snarled Ron.
"I know prefects can't dock points, Weasel King," sneered Malfoy. Crabbe and Goyle sniggered.
"But members of the Inquisitorial Squad -"
"The what!" said Hermione sharply.
"The Inquisitorial Squad, Granger," said Malfoy, pointing towards a tiny silver 'I' on his robes just beneath his prefect's badge. "A select group of students who are supportive of the Ministry of Magic, hand-picked by Professor Umbridge. Anyway, members of the Inquisitorial Squad do
Mudblood, Granger, so ten off for that."
Ron pulled out his wand, but Hermione pushed it away, whispering, "Don't!"
"Wise move, Granger," breathed Malfoy. "New Head, new times... be good now, Potty... Weasel King..."
"He was bluffing," said Ernie, looking appalled. "He can't be allowed to dock points... that
would be ridiculous... it would completely undermine the prefect system."
"Noticed, have you?" said Fred's voice.
"Malfoy just docked us all about fifty points," said Harry furiously, as they watched several more stones fly upwards from the Gryffindor hour-glass.
"Yeah, Montague tried to do us during break," said George.
"What do you mean, 'tried'?" said Ron quickly.
"He never managed to get all the words out," said Fred, "due to the fact that we forced him headfirst into that Vanishing Cabinet on the first floor."
"But you'll get into terrible trouble!"
"Not until Montague reappears, and that could take weeks, I dunno where we sent him," said
Fred coolly. "Anyway... we've decided we don't care about getting into trouble any more."
"Have you ever?" asked Hermione.
"Course we have," said George. "Never been expelled, have we?"
"We've always known where to draw the line," said Fred.
"We might have put a toe across it occasionally," said George.
"But we've always stopped short of causing real mayhem," said Fred.
"But now?" said Ron tentatively.
"Well, now -" said George.
"- what with Dumbledore gone -" said Fred.
"- we reckon a bit of mayhem --" said George.
"-- is exactly what our dear new Head deserves," said Fred.
"You mustn't!" whispered Hermione. "You really mustn't! She'd love a reason to expel you!"
"You don't get it, Hermione, do you?" said Fred, smiling at her. "We don't care about staying anymore. We'd walk out right now if we weren't determined to do our bit for Dumbledore first. So, anyway," he checked his watch, "phase one is about to begin. I'd get in the Great Hall for lunch, if I were you, that way the teachers will see you can't have had anything to do with it."
"Anything to do with what?" said Hermione anxiously.
"You'll see," said George. "Run along, now."
"I think we should get out of here, you know," said Hermione nervously. "Just in case"
"Yeah, all right," said Ron, and the three of them moved towards the doors to the Great Hall, but
"The Headmistress would like to see you, Potter," he leered.
"I didn't do it," said Harry stupidly, thinking of whatever Fred and George were planning. Filch's jowls wobbled with silent laughter.
"Guilty conscience, eh?" he wheezed. "Follow me."
climbed the marble staircase. As they reached the first landing he said, "Things are changing
around here, Potter."
"I've noticed," said Harry coldly.
"Yerse... I've been telling Dumbledore for years and years he's too soft with you all," said Filch,
chuckling nastily. "You filthy little beasts would never have dropped Stink Pellets if you'd
Peeves... oh, things are going to be very different around here with her in charge."
"Here we are," he said, leering down at Harry as he rapped three times on Professor Umbridge's
door and pushed it open. "The Potter boy to see you, Ma'am."
"Thank you, Argus," she said sweetly.
"Not at all, Ma'am, not at all," said Filch, bowing as low as his rheumatism would permit, and
"Sit," said Umbridge curtly, pointing towards a chair. Harry sat. She continued to scribble for a
"Well, now," she said finally, setting down her quill and surveying him complacently, like a toad
about to swallow a particularly juicy fly. "What would you like to drink?"
"What?" said Harry, quite sure he had misheard her.
"To drink, Mr. Potter," she said, smiling still more widely. "Tea? Coffee? Pumpkin juice?"
"Nothing, thank you," said Harry.
"I wish you to have a drink with me," she said, her voice becoming dangerously sweet. "Choose
one."
"Fine... tea then," said Harry, shrugging.
"There," she said, handing it to him. "Drink it before it gets cold, won't you? Well, now, Mr.
Potter... I thought we ought to have a little chat, after the distressing events of last night."
had passed in silence, she said gaily, "You're not drinking up!"
"What's the matter?" said Umbridge, who was still watching him closely. "Do you want sugar?"
"No," said Harry.
"Good," she whispered. "Very good. Now then..." She leaned forwards a little. "Where is Albus
Dumbledore?"
"No idea," said Harry promptly.
"Drink up, drink up," she said, still smiling. "Now, Mr. Potter, let us not play childish games. I
the beginning. Consider your position, Mr. Potter..."
"I don't know where he is," Harry repeated.
"Very well," she said, though she looked displeased. "In that case, you will kindly tell me the
whereabouts of Sirius Black."
"I don't know," he said, a little too quickly.
"Mr. Potter," said Umbridge, "let me remind you that it was I who almost caught the criminal
where is Sirius Black?"
"No idea," said Harry loudly. "Haven't got a clue."
"Very well, Potter, I will take your word for it this time, but be warned: the might of the Ministry
evidence..."
"What was -?"
"Back to lunch you go, Potter!" cried Umbridge, raising her wand and dashing out of the office.
"Hurry, Filch, hurry!" shrieked Umbridge, "they'll be all over the school unless we do something
- Stupefy"
"Don't Stun them, Filch!" shouted Umbridge angrily, for all the world as though it had been his
"Right you are, Headmistress!" wheezed Filch, who as a Squib could no more have Stunned the
"Impressive," Harry said quietly, grinning. "Very impressive... you'll put Dr. Filibuster out of
business, no problem..."
"Cheers," whispered George, wiping tears of laughter from his face. "Oh, I hope she tries
Vanishing them next... they multiply by ten every time you try."
"Dear, dear," said Professor McGonagall sardonically, as one of the dragons soared around her
classroom, emitting loud bangs and exhaling flame. "Miss Brown, would you mind running
classroom?"
"Thank you so much, Professor!" said Professor Flitwick in his squeaky little voice. "I could have got rid of the sparklers myself, of course, but I wasn't sure whether or not I had the authority."
"They were wonderful fireworks," she said admiringly.
"Thanks," said George, looking both surprised and pleased. "Weasleys' Wildfire Whiz-bangs.
Only thing is, we used our whole stock; we're going to have to start again from scratch now."
"It was worth it, though," said Fred, who was taking orders from clamouring Gryffindors. "If you want to add your name to the waiting list, Hermione, it's five Galleons for your Basic Blaze box and twenty for the Deflagration Deluxe..."
"Oh, why don't we have a night off?" said Hermione brightly, as a silver-tailed Weasley rocket
zoomed past the window. "After all, the Easter holidays start on Friday, we'll have plenty of time then."
"Are you feeling all right?" Ron asked, staring at her in disbelief.
"Now you mention it," said Hermione happily, "d'you know... I think I'm feeling a
bit... rebellious."
"Cool!" said Seamus, who was silhouetted against the window. "I think one of those Catherine
wheels hit a rocket and it's like they mated, come and see!"
"Over here," said Harry, glad of a reason to postpone his meeting with Snape, and beckoning her
now almost empty. "Are you okay? Umbridge hasn't been asking you about the D.A., has she?"
"Oh, no," said Cho hurriedly. "No, it was only... well, I just wanted to say... Harry, I never
dreamed Marietta would tell..."
"Yeah, well," said Harry moodily. He did feel Cho might have chosen her friends a bit more
"She's a lovely person really," said Cho. "She just made a mistake -"
"A lovely person who made a mistake? She sold us all out, including you!"
"Well... we all got away, didn't we?" said Cho pleadingly. "You know, her mum works for the
Ministry, it's really difficult for her -"
"Ron's dad works for the Ministry too!" Harry said furiously. "And in case you hadn't noticed, he hasn't got sneak written across his face -"
"That was a really horrible trick of Hermione Granger's," said Cho fiercely. "She should have
told us she'd jinxed that list -"
"I think it was a brilliant idea," said Harry coldly. Cho flushed and her eyes grew brighter.
"Oh yes, I forgot - of course, if it was darling Hermione's idea -"
"Don't start crying again," said Harry warningly.
"I wasn't going to!" she shouted.
"Yeah... well... good," he said. "I've got enough to cope with at the moment."
"Go and cope with it then!" Cho said furiously, turning on her heel and stalking off.
"You're late, Potter," said Snape coldly, as Harry closed the door behind him.
"So," he said. "Have you been practicing?"
"Yes," Harry lied, looking carefully at one of the legs of Snape's desk.
"Well, we'll soon find out, won't we?" said Snape smoothly. "Wand out, Potter."
"On the count of three then," said Snape lazily. "One - two -"
"Professor Snape, sir - oh - sorry -"
"It's all right, Draco," said Snape, lowering his w and. "Potter is here for a little remedial Potions."
"I didn't know," he said, leering at Harry, who knew his face was burning. He would have given
"Well, Draco, what is it?" asked Snape.
"It's Professor Umbridge, sir - she needs your help," said Malfoy. "They've found Montague, sir, he's turned up jammed inside a toilet on the fourth floor."
"How did he get in there?" demanded Snape.
"I don't know, sir, he's a bit confused."
"Very well, very well. Potter," said Snape, "we shall resume this lesson tomorrow evening."
He turned and swept from his office. Malfoy mouthed, "Remedial Potions?" at Harry behind
"Five more minutes!"
"Quills down, please!" squeaked Professor Flitwick. "That means you too, Stebbins! Please
remain seated while I collect your parchment! Accio!"
"Thank you... thank you," panted Professor Flitwick. "Very well, everybody, you're free to go!"
"Did you like question ten, Moony?" asked Sirius as they emerged into the Entrance Hall.
"Loved it," said Lupin briskly. "Give five signs that identify the werewolf. Excellent question."
"D'you think you managed to get all the signs?" said James in tones of mock concern.
"Think I did," said Lupin seriously, as they joined the crowd thronging around the front doors
eager to get out into the sunlit grounds. "One: he's sitting on my chair. Two: he's wearing my
clothes. Three: his name's Remus Lupin."
"I got the snout shape, the pupils of the eyes and the tufted tail,' he said anxiously, "but I couldn't think what else -"
"How thick are you, Wormtail?" said James impatiently. "You run round with a werewolf once a
month -"
"Keep your voice down," implored Lupin.
"Well, I thought that paper was a piece of cake," he heard Sirius say. "I'll be surprised if I don't
get 'Outstanding' on it at least."
"Me too," said James. He put his hand in his pocket and took out a struggling Golden Snitch.
"Where'd you get that?"
"Nicked it," said James casually. He started playing with the Snitch, allowing it to fly as much as
"Put that away, will you," said Sirius finally, as James made a fine catch and Wormtail let out a
cheer, "before Wormtail wets himself with excitement."
"If it bothers you," he said, stuffing the Snitch back in his pocket. Harry had the distinct
"I'm bored," said Sirius. "Wish it was full moon."
"You might," said Lupin darkly from behind his book. "We've still got Transfiguration, if you're
bored you could test me. Here..." and he held out his book.
But Sirius snorted. "I don't need to look at that rubbish, I know it all."
"This'll liven you up, Padfoot," said James quietly. "Look who it is..."
"Excellent," he said softly. "Snivellus."
"All right, Snivellus?" said James loudly.
"Expelliarmus!"
"Impedimenta!" he said, pointing his wand at Snape, who was knocked off his feet halfway
"How'd the exam go, Snivelly?" said James.
"I was watching him, his nose was touching the parchment," said Sirius viciously. "There'll be
great grease marks all over it, they won't be able to read a word."
"You - wait," he panted, staring up at James with an expression of purest loathing, "you - wait!"
"Wait for what?" said Sirius coolly. "What're you going to do, Snivelly, wipe your nose on us?"
"Wash out your mouth," said James coldly. "Scourgify!"
"Leave him ALONE!"
"All right, Evans?" said James, and the tone of his voice was suddenly pleasant, deeper, more
"Leave him alone," Lily repeated. She was looking a t James with every sign of great dislike.
"What's he done to you?"
"Well," said James, appearing to deliberate the point, "it's more the fact that he exists, if you
know what I mean..."
"You think you're funny," she said coldly. "But you're just an arrogant, bullying toerag, Potter.
Leave him alone."
"I will if you go out with me, Evans," said James quickly. "Go on... go out with me and I'll never lay a wand on old Snivelly again."
"I wouldn't go out with you if it was a choice between you and the giant squid," said Lily.
"Bad luck, Prongs," said Sirius briskly, and turned back to Snape. "Oy!"
said, "Let him down!"
"Certainly," said James and he jerked his wand upwards; Snape fell into a crumpled heap on the
ground. Disentangling himself from his robes he got quickly to his feet, wand up, but Sirius said, "Locomotor mortis!" and Snape keeled over again at once, rigid as a board.
"LEAVE HIM ALONE!" Lily shouted. She had her own wand out now. James and Sirius eyed it warily.
"Ah, Evans, don't make me hex you," said James earnestly.
"Take the curse off him, then!"
"There you go," he said, as Snape struggled to his feet. "You're lucky Evans was here, Snivellus
--"
"I don't need help from filthy little Mudbloods like her!"
"Fine," she said coolly. "I won't bother in future. And I'd wash your pants if I were you, Snivellus."
"Apologize to Evans!" James roared at Snape, his wand pointed threateningly at him.
"I don't want you to make him apologize," Lily shouted, rounding on James. "You're as bad as he is."
"What?" yelped James. "I'd NEVER call you a - you-know-what!"
"Messing up your hair because you think it looks cool to look like you've just got off your
fat head on it. You make me SICK."
"Evans!" James shouted after her. "Hey, EVANS!"
"What is it with her?" said James, trying and failing to look as though this was a throwaway
"Reading between the lines, I'd say she thinks you're a bit conceited, mate," said Sirius.
"Right," said James, who looked furious now, "right -"
"Who wants to see me take off Snivelly's pants?"
"Having fun?"
"So," said Snape, gripping Harry's arm so tightly Harry's hand was starting to feel numb. "So...
been enjoying yourself, Potter?"
"N-no," said Harry, trying to free his arm.
"Amusing man, your father, wasn't he?" said Snape, shaking Harry so hard his glasses slipped
"I - didn't -"
"You will not repeat what you saw to anybody!" Snape bellowed.
"No," said Harry, getting to his feet as far from Snape as he could. "No, of course I w--"
"Get out, get out, I don't want to see you in this office ever again!"
"But why haven't you got Occlumency lessons any more?" said Hermione, frowning.
"I've told you," Harry muttered. "Snape reckons I can carry on by myself now I've got the basics."
"So you've stopped having funny dreams?" said Hermione skeptically.
"Pretty much," said Harry, not looking at her.
"Well, I don't think Snape should stop until you're absolutely sure you can control them!" said
Hermione indignantly. "Harry, I think you should go back to him and ask -"
"No," said Harry forcefully. "Just drop it, Hermione, okay?"
"How can that come as a shock?" Hermione demanded, as she tapped each little square on Ron's
"I dunno," said Ron, "there's been a lot going on. "
"Well, there you are," she said, handing him his timetable, "if you follow that you should do
fine."
"You've given me an evening off every week!"
"That's for Quidditch practice," said Hermione.
"What's the point?" he said dully. "We've got about as much chance of winning the Quidditch
Cup this year as Dad's got of becoming Minister for Magic."
"What's wrong, Harry?"
"What?" he said quickly. "Nothing."
"I saw Cho earlier," said Hermione tentatively. "She looked really miserable, too... have you two had a row again?"
"Wha -- oh, yeah, we have," said Harry, seizing gratefully on the excuse.
"What about?"
"That sneak friend of hers, Marietta," said Harry.
"Yeah, well, I don't blame you!" said Ron angrily, setting down his revision timetable. "If it
hadn't been for her..."
look angry, nod and say "Yeah" and "That's right" whenever Ron drew breath, leaving his mind
hadn't Lily asked, "What's he done to you?" And hadn't James replied, "It's more the fact that he exists, if you know what I mean." Hadn't James started it all simply because Sirius had said he was bored? Harry remembered Lupin saying back in Grimmauld Place that Dumbledore had
"Harry, I'm talking to you, can you hear me?"
"Huh?"
"Oh, hi," said Harry, pulling his books towards him. "How come you're not at practice?"
"It's over," said Ginny. "Ron had to take Jack Sloper up to the hospital wing."
"Why?"
"Well, we're not sure, but we think he knocked himself out with his own bat." She sighed heavily. "Anyway... a package just arrived, it's only just got through Umbridge's new screening process."
"It's Easter eggs from Mum," said Ginny. "There's one for you... there you go."
"Are you okay, Harry?" Ginny asked quietly.
"Yeah, I'm fine," said Harry gruffly. The lump in his throat was painful. He did not understand
"You seem really down lately," Ginny persisted. "You know, I'm sure if you just talked to Cho..."
"It's not Cho I want to talk to," said Harry brusquely.
"Who is it, then?" asked Ginny, watching him closely.
"I..."
"I wish I could talk to Sirius," he muttered. "But I know I can't."
"Well," said Ginny slowly, helping herself to a bit of egg, too, "if you really want to talk to Sirius, I expect we could think of a way to do it."
"Come on," said Harry dully. "With Umbridge policing the fires and reading all our mail?"
"The thing about growing up with Fred and George," said Ginny thoughtfully, "is that you sort of start thinking anything's possible if you've got enough nerve."
"WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU ARE DOING?"
"Oh damn," whispered Ginny, jumping to her feet. "I forgot -" Madam Pince was swooping down on them, her shriveled face contorted with rage.
"Chocolate in the library!" she screamed. "Out - out - OUT!" And whipping out her wand, she
"Well, I don't fancy Healing," said Ron on the last evening of the holidays. He was immersed in
a leaflet that carried the crossed bone-and-wand emblem of St. Mungo's on its front. "It says here you need at least E at NEWT level in Potions, Herbology, Transfiguration, Charms and Defense Against the Dark Arts. I mean... blimey... don't want much, do they?"
"Well, it's a very responsible job, isn't it?" said Hermione absently.
"You don't seem to need many qualifications to liaise with Muggles; all they want is an OWL in Muggle Studies: 'Much more important is your enthusiasm, patience and a good sense of fun!'"
"You'd need more than a good sense of fun to liaise with my uncle," said Harry darkly. "Good
sense of when to duck, more like." He was halfway through a pamphlet on wizard banking.
"Listen to this: Are you seeking a challenging career involving travel, adventure and substantial,
Arithmancy, though; you could do it, Hermione!"
"I don't much fancy banking," said Hermione vaguely, now immersed in: HAVE YOU GOT
"Hey," said a voice in Harry's ear. He looked round; Fred and George had come to join them.
"Ginnys had a word with us about you," said Fred, stretching out his legs on the table in front of
floor. "She says you need to talk to Sirius?"
"What?" said Hermione sharply, freezing with her hand halfway towards picking up MAKE A
"Yeah..." said Harry, trying to sound casual, "yeah, I thought I'd like -"
"Don't be so ridiculous," said Hermione, straightening up and looking at him as though she could not believe her eyes. "With Umbridge groping around in the fires and frisking all the owls?"
"Well, we think we can find a way around that," said George, stretching and smiling. "It's a
quiet on the mayhem front during the Easter holidays?"
"What was the point, we asked ourselves, of disrupting leisure time?" continued Fred. "No point
would be the very last thing we'd want to do."
"But its business as usual from tomorrow," Fred continued briskly. "And if we're going to be
causing a bit of uproar, why not do it so that Harry can have his chat with Sirius?"
"Yes, but still," said Hermione, with an air of explaining something very simple to somebody
very obtuse, "even if you do cause a diversion, how is Harry supposed to talk to him?"
"Umbridge's office," said Harry quietly.
"Are - you - insane?" said Hermione in a hushed voice.
"I don't think so," said Harry, shrugging.
"And how are you going to get in there in the first place?"
"Sirius's knife," he said.
"Excuse me?"
"Christmas before last Sirius gave me a knife that'll open any lock," said Harry. "So even if she's bewitched the door so Alohomora won't work, which I bet she has -"
"What do you think about this?" Hermione demanded of Ron, and Harry was reminded
"I dunno," said Ron, looking alarmed at being asked to give an opinion. "If Harry wants to do it,
it's up to him, isn't it?"
"Spoken like a true friend and Weasley," said Fred, clapping Ron hard on the back. "Right, then.
minutes?" he said, looking at George.
"Easy," said George.
"What sort of diversion is it?" asked Ron.
"You'll see, little bro'," said Fred, as he and George got up again. "At least, you will if you trot
along to Gregory the Smarmy's corridor round about five o'clock tomorrow."
"... and if she does catch you there, apart from being expelled, she'll be able to guess you've
her questions..."
"Hermione," said Ron in a low and indignant voice, "are you going to stop telling Harry off and
listen to Binns, or am I going to have to take my own notes?"
"You take notes for a change, it won't kill you!"
"Whoops," he said softly. "Another zero, then, Potter."
"I'm sorry!" said Hermione, with her hands over her mouth. "I'm really sorry, Harry. I thought
you'd finished, so I cleared up!"
"Sorry, Professor," he panted, as he closed the door. "I forgot."
"No matter, Potter," she said briskly, but as she spoke, somebody else sniffed from the corner.
"Sit down, Potter," said Professor McGonagall tersely. Her hands shook slightly as she shuffled
"Well, Potter, this meeting is to talk over any career ideas you might have, and to help you
decide which subjects you should continue into the sixth and seventh years," said Professor
McGonagall. "Have you had any thoughts about what you would like to do after you leave
Hogwarts?"
"Er -" said Harry.
"Yes?" Professor McGonagall prompted Harry.
"Well, I thought of, maybe, being an Auror," Harry mumbled.
"You'd need top grades for that," said Professor McGonagall, extracting a small, dark leaflet
from under the mass on her desk and opening it. "They ask for a minimum of five NEWTs, and
nothing under 'Exceeds Expectations' grade, I see. Then you would be required to undergo a stringent series of character and aptitude tests at the Auror office. It's a difficult career path, Potter, they only take the best. In fact, I don't think anybody has been taken on in the last three years."
"You'll want to know which subjects you ought to take, I suppose?" she went on, talking a little
"Yes," said Harry. "Defense Against the Dark Arts, I suppose?"
"Naturally," said Professor McGonagall crisply. "I would also advise -"
"I would also advise Transfiguration, because Aurors frequently need to Transfigure or
my NEWT classes unless they have achieved 'Exceeds Expectations' or higher at Ordinary Wizarding Level. I'd say you're averaging 'Acceptable' at the moment, so you'll need to put in some good hard work before the exams to stand a chance of continuing. Then you ought to do Charms, always useful, and Potions. Yes, Potter, Potions," she added, with the merest flicker of a smile. "Poisons and antidotes are essential study for Aurors. And I must tell you that Professor Snape absolutely refuses to take students who get anything other than 'Outstanding' in their OWLs, so -"
"May I offer you a cough drop, Dolores?" Professor McGonagall asked curtly, without looking at Professor Umbridge.
"Oh, no, thank you very much," said Umbridge, with that simpering laugh Harry hated so much.
"I just wondered whether I could make the teensiest interruption, Minerva?"
"I daresay you'll find you can," said Professor McGonagall through tightly gritted teeth.
"I was just wondering whether Mr. Potter has quite the temperament for an Auror?" said Professor Umbridge sweetly.
"Were you?" said Professor McGonagall haughtily. "Well, Potter," she continued, as though there had been no interruption, "if you are serious in this ambition, I would advise you to concentrate hard on bringing your Transfiguration and Potions up to scratch. I see Professor Flitwick has graded you between 'Acceptable' and 'Exceeds Expectations' for the last two years, so your Charmwork seems satisfactory. As for Defense Against the Dark Arts, your marks have been generally high, Professor Lupin in particular thought you - are you quite sure you wouldn't like a cough drop, Dolores!"
"Oh, no need, thank you, Minerva" simpered Professor Umbridge, who had just coughed her
loudest yet. "I was just concerned that you might not have Harrys most recent Defense Against
the Dark Arts marks in front of you. I'm quite sure I slipped in a note."
"What, this thing?" said Professor McGonagall in a tone of revulsion, as she pulled a sheet of
"Yes, as I was saying, Potter, Professor Lupin thought you showed a pronounced aptitude for the
subject, and obviously for an Auror -"
"Did you not understand my note, Minerva?" asked Professor Umbridge in honeyed tones, quite
"Of course I understood it," said Professor McGonagall, her teeth clenched so tightly the words
"Well, then, I am confused... I'm afraid I don't quite understand how you can give Mr. Potter
false hope that -"
"False hope?" repeated Professor McGonagall, still refusing to look round at Professor
Umbridge. "He has achieved high marks in all his Defense Against the Dark Arts tests -"
"I'm terribly sorry to have to contradict you, Minerva, but as you will see from my note, Harry
has been achieving very poor results in his classes with me -"
"I should have made my meaning plainer," said Professor McGonagall, turning at last to look
Umbridge directly in the eyes. "He has achieved high marks in all Defense Against the Dark Arts
tests set by a competent teacher."
"Any questions, Potter?"
"Yes," said Harry. "What sort of character and aptitude tests do the Ministry do on you, if you get enough NEWTs?"
"Well, you'll need to demonstrate the ability to react well to pressure and so forth," said
Professor McGonagall, "perseverance and dedication, because Auror training takes a further
even after you've left school, so unless you're prepared to -"
"I think you'll also find," said Umbridge, her voice very cold now, "that the Ministry looks into
the records of those applying to be Aurors. Their criminal records."
"- unless you're prepared to take even more exams after Hogwarts, you should really look at
another -"
"Which means that this boy has as much chance of becoming an Auror as Dumbledore has of
ever returning to this school."
"A very good chance, then," said Professor McGonagall.
"Potter has a criminal record," said Umbridge loudly.
"Potter has been cleared of all charges," said McGonagall, even more loudly.
"Potter has no chance whatsoever of becoming an Auror!"
"Potter," she said in ringing tones, "I will assist you to become an Auror if it is the last thing I do! If I have to coach you nightly, I will make sure you achieve the required results!"
"The Minister for Magic will never employ Harry Potter!" said Umbridge, her voice rising
"There may well be a new Minister for Magic by the time Potter is ready to join!" shouted
"Aha!" shrieked Professor Umbridge, pointing a stubby finger at McGonagall. "Yes! Yes, yes,
Undersecretary to the Minister and Headmistress to boot!"
"You are raving," said Professor McGonagall, superbly disdainful. "Potter, that concludes our
careers consultation."
"I hope you've thought better of what you were planning to do, Harry," Hermione whispered, the moment they had opened their books to 'Chapter Thirty-four, Non-Retaliation and Negotiation'.
"Umbridge looks like she's in a really bad mood already..."
"Dumbledore sacrificed himself to keep you in school, Harry!" whispered Hermione, raising her
book to hide her face from Umbridge. "And if you get thrown out today it will all have been for
nothing!"
"Harry, don't do it, please don't do it!" Hermione said in anguished tones as the bell rang at the
voice, "Give it a rest, okay? He can make up his own mind."
"Harry - please!" Hermione pleaded weakly.
"Number twelve, Grimmauld Place!" Harry said loudly and clearly.
"Sirius?"
"Harry!" he said, looking thoroughly shocked. "What are you - what's happened, is everything all right?"
"Yeah," said Harry. "I just wondered -- I mean, I just fancied a - a chat with Sirius."
"I'll call him," said Lupin, getting to his feet, still looking perplexed, "he went upstairs to look for Kreacher, he seems to be hiding in the attic again..."
"What is it?" said Sirius urgently, sweeping his long dark hair out of his eyes and dropping to the
very concerned. "Are you all right? Do you need help?"
"No," said Harry, "it's nothing like that... I just wanted to talk... about my dad."
When he had finished, neither Sirius nor Lupin spoke for a moment. Then Lupin said quietly, "I
wouldn't like you to judge your father on what you saw there, Harry. He was only fifteen -"
"I'm fifteen!" said Harry heatedly.
"Look, Harry" said Sirius placatingly, "James and Snape hated each other from the moment they
Dark Arts."
"Yeah," said Harry, "but he just attacked Snape for no good reason, just because - well, just
because you said you were bored," he finished, with a slightly apologetic note in his voice.
"I'm not proud of it," said Sirius quickly.
Lupin looked sideways at Sirius, then said, "Look, Harry, what you've got to understand is that
were the height of cool - if they sometimes got a bit carried away -"
"If we were sometimes arrogant little berks, you mean," said Sirius.
"He kept messing up his hair," said Harry in a pained voice.
"I'd forgotten he used to do that," said Sirius affectionately.
"Was he playing with the Snitch?" said Lupin eagerly.
"Yeah," said Harry, watching uncomprehendingly as Sirius and Lupin beamed reminiscently.
"Well... I thought he was a bit of an idiot."
"Of course he was a bit of an idiot!" said Sirius bracingly, "we were all idiots! Well - not Moony
so much," he said fairly, looking at Lupin.
But Lupin shook his head. "Did I ever tell you to lay off Snape?" he said. "Did I ever have the
guts to tell you I thought you were out of order?"
"Yeah, well," said Sirius, "you made us feel ashamed of ourselves sometimes... that was
something..."
"And," said Harry doggedly, determined to say everything that was on his mind now he was here, "he kept looking over at the girls by the lake, hoping they were watching him!"
"Oh, well, he always made a fool of himself whenever Lily was around," said Sirius, shrugging,
"he couldn't stop himself showing off whenever he got near her."
"How come she married him?" Harry asked miserably. "She hated him!"
"Nah, she didn't," said Sirius.
"She started going out with him in seventh year," said Lupin.
"Once James had deflated his head a bit," said Sirius.
"And stopped hexing people just for the fun of it," said Lupin.
"Even Snape?" said Harry.
"Well," said Lupin slowly, "Snape was a special case I mean, he never lost an opportunity to
curse James so you couldn't really expect James to take that lying down, could you?"
"And my mum was okay with that?"
"She didn't know too much about it, to tell you the truth," said Sirius. "I mean, James didn't take
Snape on dates with her and jinx him in front of her, did he?"
"Look," he said, "your father was the best friend I ever had and he was a good person. A lot of
people are idiots at the age of fifteen. He grew out of it."
"Yeah, okay," said Harry heavily. "I just never thought I'd feel sorry for Snape."
"Now you mention it," said Lupin, a faint crease between his eyebrows, "how did Snape react
when he found you'd seen all this?"
"He told me he'd never teach me Occlumency again," said Harry indifferently, "like that's a big
disappoint--"
"He WHAT?" shouted Sirius, causing Harry to jump and inhale a mouthful of ashes.
"Are you serious, Harry?" said Lupin quickly. "He's stopped giving you lessons?"
"Yeah," said Harry, surprised at what he considered a great over-reaction. "But it's okay, I don't
care, it's a bit of a relief to tell you the -"
"I'm coming up there to have a word with Snape!" said Sirius forcefully, and he actually made to stand up, but Lupin wrenched him back down again.
"If anyone's going to tell Snape it will be me!" he said firmly. "But Harry, first of all, you're to
Dumbledore hears -"
"I can't tell him that, he'd kill me!" said Harry, outraged. "You didn't see him when we got out of the Pensieve."
"Harry there is nothing so important as you learning Occlumency!" said Lupin sternly. "Do you
understand me? Nothing!"
"Okay, okay," said Harry, thoroughly discomposed, not to mention annoyed. "I'll... I'll try and say something to him... but it won't be-"
"Is that Kreacher coming downstairs?"
"No," said Sirius, glancing behind him. "It must be somebody your end." Harrys heart skipped
"I'd better go!" he said hastily and pulled his head backwards out of the Grimmauld Place fire. For a moment his head seemed to be revolving on his shoulders, then he found himself kneeling in front of Umbridge's fire with it firmly back on and watching the emerald flames flicker and die.
"Quickly, quickly!" he heard a wheezy voice mutter right outside the office door. "Ah, she's left
it open -"
"Approval for Whipping... Approval for Whipping... I can do it at last... they've had it coming
to them for years..."
"So!" said Umbridge triumphantly. Harry realized she was standing just a few stairs in front of
him, once more looking down upon her prey. "So - you think it amusing to turn a school corridor
into a swamp, do you?"
"Pretty amusing, yeah," said Fred, looking up at her without the slightest sign of fear.
"I've got the form, Headmistress," he said hoarsely, waving the piece of parchment Harry had
just seen him take from her desk. "I've got the form and I've got the whips waiting... oh, let me
do it now..."
"Very good, Argus," she said. "You two," she went on, gazing down at Fred and George, "are
about to learn what happens to wrongdoers in my school."
"You know what?" said Fred. "I don't think we are."
"George," said Fred, "I think we've outgrown full-time education."
"Yeah, I've been feeling that way myself," said George lightly.
"Time to test our talents in the real world, d'you reckon?" asked Fred.
"Definitely," said George.
"Accio brooms!"
"We won't be seeing you," Fred told Professor Umbridge, swinging his leg over his broomstick.
"Yeah, don't bother to keep in touch," said George, mounting his own.
"If anyone fancies buying a Portable Swamp, as demonstrated upstairs, come to number ninety-three, Diagon Alley - Weasleys' Wizarding Wheezes," he said in a loud voice. "Our new
premises!"
"Special discounts to Hogwarts students who swear they're going to use our products to get rid of this old bat," added George, pointing at Professor Umbridge.
"STOP THEM!" shrieked Umbridge, but it was too late. As the Inquisitorial Squad closed in,
"Give her hell from us, Peeves."
heard students saying things like, "Honestly some days I just feel like jumping on my broom and
leaving this place," or else, "One more lesson like that and I might just do a Weasley."
poltergeist out of the corner of her mouth, "It unscrews the other way."
"Should we say something?" said Hermione in a worried voice, pressing her cheek against the
Charms window so that she could see Mr. and Mrs. Montague marching inside. "About what
happened to him? In case it helps Madam Pomfrey cure him?"
"Course not, he'll recover," said Ron indifferently.
"Anyway, more trouble for Umbridge, isn't it?" said Harry in a satisfied voice.
"Reparo," said Hermione quickly, mending Ron's cup with a wave of her wand. "That's all very
well, but what if Montague's permanently injured?"
"Who cares?" said Ron irritably, while his teacup stood up drunkenly again, trembling violently
at the knees. "Montague shouldn't have tried to take all those points from Gryffindor, should he?
If you want to worry about anyone, Hermione, worry about me!"
"You?" she said, catching her teacup as it scampered happily away across the desk on four sturdy little willow-patterned legs, and replacing it in front of her. "Why should I be worried about you?"
"When Mum's next letter finally gets through Umbridge's screening process," said Ron bitterly,
now holding his cup up while its frail legs tried feebly to support its weight, "I'm going to be in
deep trouble. I wouldn't be surprised if she's sent another Howler."
"But -"
"It'll be my fault Fred and George left, you wait, " said Ron darkly. "She'll say I should've
yeah, it'll be all my fault."
"Well, if she does say that it'll be very unfair, you couldn't have done anything! But I'm sure she won't, I mean, if it's really true they've got premises in Diagon Alley, they must have been
planning this for ages."
"Yeah, but that's another thing, how did they get premises?" said Ron, hitting his teacup so hard
with his wand that its legs collapsed again and it lay twitching before him. "It's a bit dodgy isn't
know what they've been up to, to get their hands on that sort of gold."
"Well, yes, that occurred to me, too," said Hermione, allowing her teacup to jog in neat little
circles around Harry's, whose stubby little legs were still unable to touch the desktop, "I've been
wondering whether Mundungus has persuaded them to sell stolen goods or something awful."
"He hasn't," said Harry curtly.
"How do you know?" said Ron and Hermione together.
"Because -" Harry hesitated, but the moment to confess finally seemed to have come. There was
criminals. "Because they got the gold from me. I gave them my Triwizard winnings last June."
"Oh, Harry, you didn't!" she said.
"Yes, I did," said Harry mutinously. "And I don't regret it, either. I didn't need the gold and
they'll be great at running a joke shop."
"But this is excellent!" said Ron, looking thrilled. "It's all your fault, Harry - Mum can't blame
me at all! Can I tell her?"
"Yeah, I suppose you'd better," said Harry dully, "specially if she thinks they're receiving stolen
cauldrons or something."
"It's no good nagging me, it's done," he said firmly. "Fred and George have got the gold - spent a good bit of it, too, by the sounds of it - and I can't get it back from them and I don't want to. So
save your breath, Hermione."
"I wasn't going to say anything about Fred and George!" she said in an injured voice.
"No, I wasn't!" she said angrily. "As a matter of fact, I was going to ask Harry when he's going
to go back to Snape and ask for more Occlumency lessons!"
"You can't tell me you've stopped having funny dreams," Hermione said now, "because Ron told me you were muttering in your sleep again last night."
"You were only muttering a bit," he mumbled apologetically. "Something about 'just a bit
further'."
"I dreamed I was watching you lot play Quidditch," Harry lied brutally. "I was trying to get you
to stretch out a bit further to grab the Quaffle."
"You are trying to block your mind, aren't you?" said Hermione, looking beadily at Harry. "You
are keeping going with your Occlumency?"
"Of course I am," said Harry, trying to sound as though this question was insulting, but not quite
"You know," said Ron, whose ears were still flaming red, "if Montague doesn't recover before
Slytherin play Hufflepuff, we might be in with a chance of winning the Cup."
"Yeah, I s'pose so," said Harry, glad of a change of subject.
"I mean, we've won one, lost one - if Slytherin lose to Hufflepuff next Saturday -"
"Yeah, that's right," said Harry, losing track of what he was agreeing to. Cho Chang had just
"I mean, I can't get any worse, can I?" he told Harry and Hermione grimly over breakfast on the
morning of the match. "Nothing to lose now, is there?"
"You know," said Hermione, as she and Harry walked down to the pitch a little later in the midst
of a very excitable crowd, "I think Ron might do better without Fred and George around. They
never exactly gave him a lot of confidence."
"Oh, gosh, I forgot!" said Hermione, watching the eagle flapping its wings as Luna walked
serenely past a group of cackling and pointing Slytherins. "Cho will be playing, won't she?"
"... Bradley... Davies... Chang," he said, and Harry felt his stomach perform, less of a back flip,
"And they're off!" said Lee. "And Davies takes the Quaffle immediately, Ravenclaw Captain
going straight for goal! He's going to shoot - and - and -" Lee swore very loudly. "And he's
scored."
Slytherins on the other side of the stands began to sing: "Weasley cannot save a thing He cannot block a single ring..."
"Harry" said a hoarse voice in Harrys ear. "Hermione..."
"Listen," he whispered, "can yeh come with me? Now? While ev'ryone's watchin' the match?"
"Er... can't it wait, Hagrid?" asked Harry. "Till the match is over?"
"No," said Hagrid. "No, Harry, it's gotta be now... while ev'ryone's lookin' the other way...
please?"
"Course," said Harry at once, "course we'll come."
"I 'ppreciate this, you two, I really do," said Hag rid as they reached the stairs. He kept looking
around nervously as they descended towards the lawn below. "I jus' hope she doesn' notice us
goin'."
"You mean Umbridge?" said Harry. "She won't, she's got her whole Inquisitorial Squad sitting
with her, didn't you see? She must be expecting trouble at the match."
"Yeah, well, a bit o' trouble wouldn' hurt," said Hagrid, pausing to peer around the edge of the
stands to make sure the stretch of lawn between there and his cabin was deserted. "Give us more
time."
"What is it, Hagrid?" said Hermione, looking up at him with a concerned expression on her face
"Yeh - yeh'll see in a mo'," said Hagrid, looking over his shoulder as a great roar rose from the
stands behind them. "Hey - did someone jus' score?"
"It'll be Ravenclaw," said Harry heavily.
"Good... good..." said Hagrid distractedly. "Tha's good..."
"We're goin' in here," he said, jerking his shaggy head behind him.
"Into the Forest?" said Hermione, perplexed.
"Yeah," said Hagrid. "C'mon now, quick, before we're spotted!"
"Hagrid, why are you armed?" said Harry.
"Jus' a precaution," said Hagrid, shrugging his massive shoulders.
"You didn't bring your crossbow the day you showed us the Thestrals," said Hermione timidly.
"Nah, well, we weren' goin' in so far then," said Hagrid. "An' anyway, tha' was before Firenze
left the Forest, wasn' it?"
"Why does Firenze leaving make a difference?" asked Hermione curiously.
"Cause the other centaurs are good an' riled at me, tha's why," said Hagrid quietly, glancing
around. "They used ter be - well, yeh couldn' call 'em friendly -- but we got on all righ'. Kept
'emselves to 'emselves, bu' always turned up if I wanted a word. Not any more."
"Firenze said they're angry because he went to work for Dumbledore," Harry said, tripping on a
"Yeah," said Hagrid heavily. "Well, angry doesn' cover it. Ruddy livid. If I hadn' stepped in, I
reckon they'd've kicked Firenze ter death -"
"They attacked him?" said Hermione, sounding shocked.
"Yep," said Hagrid gruffly, forcing his way through several low-hanging branches. "He had half
the herd on to him."
"And you stopped it?" said Harry, amazed and impressed. "By yourself?"
"Course I did, couldn't stand by an' watch 'em kill 'im, could I?" said Hagrid. "Lucky I was
me stupid warnin's!" he added hotly and unexpectedly.
"Anyway," he said, breathing a little more heavily than -usual, "since then the other centaurs've
creatures in here."
"Is that why we're here, Hagrid?" asked Hermione. "The centaurs?"
"Ah, no," said Hagrid, shaking his head dismissively, "no, it's not them. Well, o' course, they
could complicate the problem, yeah... but yeh'll see what I mean in a bit."
"Hagrid!" said Harry, fighting his way through thickly knotted brambles, over which Hagrid had
occasion he had stepped off the Forest path. "Where are we going?"
"Bit further," said Hagrid over his shoulder. "C'mon, Harry... we need ter keep together now."
"Hagrid, would it be all right if we lit our wands?" said Hermione quietly.
"Er... all righ'," Hagrid whispered back. "In fact -"
"Maybe we bes' jus' stop fer a momen', so I can... fill yeh in," said Hagrid. "Before we ge' there, like."
"Good!" said Hermione, as Harry set her back on her feet. They both murmured "Lumos!" and
"Righ'," said Hagrid. "Well... see... the thing is..."
"Well, there's a good chance I'm goin' ter be gettin' the sack any day now," he said.
"But you've lasted this long -" Hermione said tentatively. "What makes you think -"
"Umbridge reckons it was me that put tha' Niffler in her office."
"And was it?" said Harry, before he could stop himself.
"No, it ruddy well wasn'!" said Hagrid indignantly. "On'y any-thin' ter do with magical creatures an' she thinks it's got somethin' ter do with me. Yeh know she's bin lookin' fer a chance ter get rid of me ever since I got back. I don' wan' ter go, o' course, but if it wasn' fer... well... the special circumstances I'm abou' ter explain to yeh, I'd leave righ' now, before she's go' the chance ter do it in front o' the whole school, like she did with Trelawney."
"It's not the end o' the world, I'll be able ter help Dumbledore once I'm outta here, I can be
fine..."
"Don' worry abou' me," he said hastily, as Hermione made to pat his arm. He pulled his
"Look, I wouldn' be tellin' yer this at all if I didn' have ter. See, if I go... well, I can' leave
he's willin'."
"Of course we'll help you," said Harry at once. "What do you want us to do?"
"I knew yeh'd say yes," said Hagrid into his handkerchief, "but I won'... never... forget...
well... c'mon... jus' a little bit further through here... watch yerselves, now, there's nettles..."
"Really easy" he said softly. "Very quiet, now..."
"Sleepin'," breathed Hagrid.
"Hagrid," she said in a whisper barely audible over the sound of the sleeping creature, "who is
he?"
Harry found this an odd question..."What is it?" was the one he had been planning on asking.
"Hagrid, you told us -" said Hermione, her wand now shaking in her hand, "you told us none of
them wanted to come!"
"Well - no - he didn' want ter come," said Hagrid, sounding desperate. "But I had ter bring him,
Hermione, I had ter!"
"But why?" asked Hermione, who sounded as though she wanted to cry. "Why - what -
oh, Hagrid!"
"I knew if I jus' got him back," said Hagrid, sounding close to tears himself, "an' - an' taught him a few manners - I'd be able ter take him outside an' show ev'ryone he's harmless!"
"Harmless!" said Hermione shrilly, and Hagrid made frantic hushing noises with his hands as the
enormous creature before them grunted loudly and shifted in its sleep. "He's been hurting you all
this time, hasn't he? That's why you've had all these injuries!"
"He don' know his own strength!" said Hagrid earnestly. "An' he's gettin' better, he's not fightin' so much any more --"
"So, this is why it took you two months to get home!" said Hermione distractedly. "Oh, Hagrid,
own people?"
"They were all bullyin' him, Hermione, 'cause he's so small!" said Hagrid.
"Small?" said Hermione. "Small?"
"Hermione, I couldn' leave him," said Hagrid, tears now trickling down his bruised face into his
beard. "See - he's my brother!"
"Hagrid, when you say 'brother'," said Harry slowly, "d o you mean --?"
"Well - half-brother," amended Hagrid. "Turns out me mother took up with another giant when
she left me dad, an' she went an' had Grawp here -"
"Grawp?" said Harry.
"Yeah... well, tha's what it sounds like when he says his name," said Hagrid anxiously. "He don' speak a lot of English... I've bin tryin' ter teach him... anyway, she don' seem ter have liked him much more'n she liked me. See, with giantesses, what counts is producin' good big kids, and he's always been a bit on the runty side fer a giant - on'y sixteen foot -"
"Oh, yes, tiny!" said Hermione, with a kind of hysterical sarcasm. "Absolutely minuscule!"
"He was bein' kicked aroun' by all o' them - I jus' couldn' leave him -"
"Did Madame Maxime want to bring him back?" asked Harry.
"She - well, she could see it was right importan' ter me," said Hagrid, twisting his enormous
hands. "Bu' - bu' she got a bit tired o' him after a while, I must admit... so we split up on the
journey home... she promised not ter tell anyone, though..."
"How on earth did you get him back without anyone noticing?" said Harry.
"Well, tha's why it took so long, see," said Hagrid. "Could on'y travel by nigh' an' through wild
wantin' ter go back."
"Oh, Hagrid, why on earth didn't you let him!" said Hermione, flopping down on to a ripped up
tree and burying her face in her hands. "What do you think you're going to do with a violent
giant who doesn't even want to be here!"
"Well, now - 'violent' - tha's a bit harsh," said Hagrid, still twisting his hands agitatedly. "I'll admit he mighta taken a couple o' swings at me when he's bin in a bad mood, but he's gettin' better, loads better, settlin' down well."
"What are those ropes for, then?" Harry asked.
"You have to keep him tied up?" said Hermione faintly.
"Well... yeah..." said Hagrid, looking anxious. "See - it's like I say - he doesn' really know 'is
own strength."
"So, what is it you want Harry and Ron and me to do?" Hermione asked apprehensively.
"Look after him," said Hagrid croakily. "After I'm gone."
"What - what does that involve, exactly?" Hermione enquired.
"Not food or anythin'!" said Hagrid eagerly. "He can get his own food, no problem. Birds an'
him a bit... teachin' him, yeh know."
"You want us to teach him," Harry said in a hollow voice. He now understood what Firenze's
"Yeah - even if yeh jus' talk ter him a bit," said Hagrid hopefully. "Cause I reckon, if he can talk
ter people, he'll understand more that we all like 'im really, an' want 'im ter stay."
"Kind of makes you wish we had Norbert back, doesn't it?" he said, and she gave a very shaky
"Yeh'll do it, then?" said Hagrid, who did not seem to have caught what Harry had just said.
"We'll..." said Harry, already bound by his promise. "We'll try, Hagrid."
"I knew I could count on yeh, Harry," Hagrid said, beaming in a very watery way and dabbing at
his face with his handkerchief again. "An' I don' want yeh ter put yerself out too much, like... I
week an' have a little chat with 'im. I'll wake 'im up, then - introduce yeh -"
"Wha-- no!" said Hermione, jumping up. "Hagrid, no, don't wake him, really, we don't need -"
"All righ', Grawpy?" said Hagrid, in a would-be cheery voice, backing away with the long bough raised, ready to poke Grawp again. "Had a nice sleep, eh?"
"Oh my!" Harry heard Hermione squeal, terrified, beside him.
"Anyway, Grawpy," shouted Hagrid, looking up apprehensively in case of further falling eggs,
"I've brought some friends ter meet yeh. Remember, I told yeh I might? Remember, when I said
Grawpy?"
"Now, Grawpy, don' do that!" shouted Hagrid. "Tha's how you ended up pullin' up the others -"
"I got company for yeh!" Hagrid shouted. "Company, see! Look down, yeh big buffoon, I
brought yeh some friends!"
"Oh, Hagrid, don't," moaned Hermione, but Hagrid had already raised the bough again and gave
"This," said Hagrid, hastening over to where Harry and Hermione stood, "is Harry, Grawp! Harry Potter! He migh' be comin' ter visit yeh if I have ter go away, understand?"
"An' this is Hermione, see? Her--" Hagrid hesitated. Turning to Hermione, he said, "Would yeh
mind if he called yeh Hermy, Hermione? On'y it's a difficult name fer him ter remember."
"No, not at all," squeaked Hermione.
"This is Hermy, Grawp! An' she's gonna be comin' an' all! Is'n' tha' nice? Eh? Two friends fer
yeh ter - GRAWPY, NO!"
"BAD BOY, GRAWPY!" they heard Hagrid yelling, as Hermione clung to Harry behind the tree, shaking and whimpering. "VERY BAD BOY! YEH DON' GRAB - OUCH!"
"Righ'," said Hagrid thickly, getting up with one hand pinching his bleeding nose and the other
grasping his crossbow, "well... there yeh are... yeh've met him an' - an' now he'll know yeh
when yeh come back. Yeah... well..."
"Well, I reckon tha's enough fer one day," said Hagrid. "We'll -er - we'll go back now, shall we?"
"Hold it," said Hagrid abruptly, just as Harry and Hermione were struggling through a patch of
"Oh, blimey" said Hagrid quietly.
"I thought we told you, Hagrid," said a deep male voice, "that you are no longer welcome here?"
"How are yeh, Magorian?" said Hagrid warily.
"So," he said, with a nasty inflection in his voice, before turning immediately to Magorian. "We
agreed, I think, what we would do if this human ever showed his face in the Forest again?"
"'This human' now, am I?" said Hagrid testily. "Jus ' fer stoppin' all of yeh committin' murder?"
"You ought not to have meddled, Hagrid," said Magorian. "Our ways are not yours, nor are our
laws. Firenze has betrayed and dishonored us."
"I dunno how yeh'work that out," said Hagrid impatiently. "He's done nothin' except help Albus Dumbledore -"
"Firenze has entered into servitude to humans," said a grey centaur with a hard, deeply lined face.
"Servitude!" said Hagrid scathingly. "He's doin' Dumbledore a favor is all -"
"He is peddling our knowledge and secrets among humans," said Magorian quietly. "There can be no return from such disgrace."
"If yeh say so," said Hagrid, shrugging, "but personally I think yeh're makin' a big mistake -"
"As are you, human," said Bane, "coming back into our Forest when we warned you -"
"Now, yeh listen ter me," said Hagrid angrily. "I'll have less of the 'our' Forest, if it's all the
same ter yeh. It's not up ter yeh who comes an' goes in here -"
"No more is it up to you, Hagrid," said Magorian smoothly. "I shall let you pass today because
you are accompanied by your young --"
"They're not his!" interrupted Bane contemptuously. "Students, Magorian, from up at the school! They have probably already profited from the traitor Firenze's teachings."
"Nevertheless," said Magorian calmly, "the slaughter of foals is a terrible crime - we do not touch the innocent. Today, Hagrid, you pass. Henceforth, stay away from this place. You forfeited the friendship of the centaurs when you helped the traitor Firenze escape us."
"I won' be kept outta the Fores' by a bunch o' old mules like yeh!" said Hagrid loudly.
"Hagrid," said Hermione in a high-pitched and terrified voice, as both Bane and the grey centaur
pawed at the ground, "let's go, please let's go!"
"We know what you are keeping in the Forest, Hagrid!" Magorian called after them, as the
centaurs slipped out of sight. "And our tolerance is waning!"
"Yeh'll tolerate 'im as long as he's here, it's as much his Forest as yours!" he yelled, as Harry
"Calm down, you two," he said, turning to walk on while they panted along behind him. "Ruddy
old mules, though, eh?"
"Hagrid," said Hermione breathlessly, skirting the patch of nettles they had passed on their way
there, "if the centaurs don't want humans in the Forest, it doesn't really look as though Harry and
I will be able -"
"Ah, you heard what they said," said Hagrid dismissively, "they wouldn't hurt foals - I mean,
kids. Anyway, we can' let ourselves be pushed aroun' by that lot."
"Nice try," Harry murmured to Hermione, who looked crestfallen.
"Was that another goal?" asked Hagrid, pausing in the shelter of the trees as the Quidditch
stadium came into view. "Or d'yeh reckon the match is over?"
"I don't know," said Hermione miserably. Harry saw that she looked much the worse for wear;
"I reckon it's over, yeh know!" said Hagrid, still squinting towards the stadium. "Look - there's
one'll know yeh weren't there!"
"Good idea," said Harry. "Well... see you later, then, Hagrid."
"I don't believe him," said Hermione in a very unsteady voice, the moment they were out of
earshot of Hagrid. "I don't believe him. I really don't believe him."
"Calm down," said Harry.
"Calm down!" she said feverishly. "A giant! A giant in the Forest! And we're supposed to give
centaurs on the way in and out! I - don't -believe - him!"
"We haven't got to do anything yet!" Harry tried to reassure her in a quiet voice, as they joined a
stream of jabbering Hufflepuffs heading back towards the castle. "He's not asking us to do
anything unless he gets chucked out and that might not even happen."
"Oh, come off it, Harry!" said Hermione angrily, stopping dead in her tracks so that the people
behind had to swerve to avoid her. "Of course he's going to be chucked out and, to be perfectly
honest, after what we've just seen, who can blame Umbridge?"
"You didn't mean that," said Harry quietly.
"No... well... all right... I didn't," she said, wiping her eyes angrily. "But why does he have to
"I dunno -"
"Weasley is our King, Weasley is our King, He didn't let the Quaffle in, Weasley is our King..."
"And I wish they'd stop singing that stupid song," said Hermione miserably, "haven't they
gloated enough?"
"Oh, let's get in before we have to meet the Slytherins," said Hermione.
"Weasley can save anything, He never leaves a single ring, That's why Gryffindors all sing,
Weasley is our King."
"Hermione..." said Harry slowly.
"Weasley is our King, Weasley is our King, He didn't let the Quaffle in, Weasley is our King..."
"No?" said Hermione in a hushed voice.
"YES!" said Harry loudly.
"HARRY! HERMIONE!" yelled Ron, waving the silver Quidditch cup in the air and looking
quite beside himself. "WE DID IT! WE WON!"
"We'll save our news till tomorrow, shall we?" said Harry.
"Yes, all right," said Hermione wearily. "I'm not in any hurry."
"Well, I mean, I'd already let in that one of Davies's, so I wasn't feeling all that confident, but I
happened," he concluded modestly, sweeping his hair back quite unnecessarily so that it looked
bunch of gossiping third-year Hufflepuffs -- had heard him. "And then, when Chambers came at
me about five minutes later - What?" Ron asked, having stopped mid-sentence at the look on
Harry's face. "Why are you grinning?"
"I'm not," said Harry quickly, and looked down at his Transfiguration notes, attempting to
Gryffindor Quidditch player who had once sat rumpling his hair under this very tree. "I'm just
glad we won, that's all."
"Yeah," said Ron slowly, savoring the words, "we won. Did you see the look on Changs face
when Ginny got the Snitch right out from under her nose?"
"I suppose she cried, did she?" said Harry bitterly.
"Well, yeah - more out of temper than anything, though..." Ron frowned slightly. "But you saw
her chuck her broom away when she got back to the ground, didn't you?"
"Er -" said Harry.
"Well, actually... no, Ron," said Hermione with a heavy sigh, putting down her book and looking at him apologetically. "As a matter of fact, the only bit of the match Harry and I saw was
Davies's first goal."
Ron's carefully ruffled hair seemed to wilt with disappointment. "You didn't watch?" he said
faintly, looking from one to the other. "You didn't see me make any of those saves?"
"Well - no," said Hermione, stretching out a placatory hand towards him. "But Ron, we didn't
want to leave -- we had to!"
"Yeah?" said Ron, whose face was growing rather red. "How come?"
"It was Hagrid," said Harry. "He decided to tell us why he's been covered in injuries ever since
know how he gets. Anyway..."
"He brought one back and hid it in the Forest?"
"Yep," said Harry grimly.
"No," said Ron, as though by saying this he could make it untrue. "No, he can't have."
"Well, he has," said Hermione firmly. "Grawp's about sixteen feet tall, enjoys ripping up twenty-foot pine trees, and knows me," she snorted, "as Hermy."
"And Hagrid wants us to...?"
"Teach him English, yeah," said Harry.
"He's lost his mind," said Ron in an almost awed voice.
"Yes," said Hermione irritably, turning a page of Intermediate Transfiguration and glaring at a
series of diagrams showing an owl turning into a pair of opera glasses. "Yes, I'm starting to think
he has. But, unfortunately, he made Harry and me promise."
"Well, you're just going to have to break your promise, that's all," said Ron firmly. "I mean,
come on... we've got exams and we're about that far -" he held up his hand to show thumb and
forefinger almost touching "- from being chucked out as it is. And anyway... remember Norbert?
mates?"
"I know, it's just that - we promised," said Hermione in a small voice.
"Well," he sighed, "Hagrid hasn't been sacked yet, has he? He's hung on this long, maybe he'll
hang on till the end of term and we won't have to go near Grawp at all."
"How many hours d'you think you're doing a day?" he demanded of Harry and Ron as they
"I dunno," said Ron. "A few."
"More or less than eight?"
"Less, I s'pose," said Ron, looking slightly alarmed.
"I'm doing eight," said Ernie, puffing out his chest. "Eight or nine. I'm getting an hour in before
half on Monday. Not so good on Tuesday - only seven and a quarter. Then on Wednesday -"
"Of course, it's not what you know," he was heard to tell Crabbe and Goyle loudly outside
Potions a few days before the exams were to start, "it's who you know. Now, Father's been
Marchbanks - we've had her round for dinner and everything..."
"Do you think that's true?" Hermione whispered in alarm to Harry and Ron.
"Nothing we can do about it if it is," said Ron gloomily.
"I don't think it's true," said Neville quietly from behind them. "Because Griselda Marchbanks is
a friend of my gran's, and she's never mentioned the Malfoys."
"What's she like, Neville?" asked Hermione at once. "Is she strict?"
"Bit like Gran, really," said Neville in a subdued voice.
"Knowing her won't hurt your chances, though, will it?" Ron told him encouragingly.
"Oh, I don't think it will make any difference," said Neville, still more miserably. "Grans always
Mungo's" Neville looked fixedly at the floor. Harry, Ron and Hermione glanced at each other, but didn't know what to say. It was the first time Neville had acknowledged that they had met at the wizarding hospital.
"Hermione, we wanted to buy that!" shouted Ron.
"Don't be stupid," she snarled. "You might as well take Harold Dingle's powdered dragon claw
and have done with it."
"Dingle's got powdered dragon claw?" said Ron eagerly.
"Not any more," said Hermione. "I confiscated that, too. None of these things actually work, you
know."
"Dragon claw does work!" said Ron. "It's supposed to be incredible, really gives your brain a
hurt -"
"This stuff can," said Hermione grimly. "I've had a look at it, and it's actually dried Doxy
droppings."
"As you can see," Professor McGonagall told the class as they copied down the dates and times
of their exams from the blackboard, "your OWLs are spread over two successive weeks. You
"Now, I must warn you that the most stringent anti-cheating charms have been applied to your
Headmistress --" Professor McGonagall pronounced the word with the same look on her face
that Aunt Petunia had whenever she was contemplating a particularly stubborn bit of dirt "- has
the school -"
"- however, that is no reason not to do your very best. You have your own futures to think about."
"Please, Professor," said Hermione, her hand in the air, "when will we find out our results?"
"An owl will be sent to you some time in July" said Professor McGonagall.
"Excellent," said Dean Thomas in an audible whisper, "so we don't have to worry about it till the holidays."
"Why don't you just do it yourself?" he said firmly, handing the book back to her, his eyes
"Oh, my goodness," she said faintly, staring into the Entrance Hall. "Is that them? Is that the
examiners?"
"Shall we go and have a closer look?" said Ron.
"Journey was fine, journey was fine, we've made it plenty of times before!" she said impatiently. "Now, I haven't heard from Dumbledore lately!" she added, peering around the Hall as though
hopeful he might suddenly emerge from a broom cupboard. "No idea where he is, I suppose?"
"None at all," said Umbridge, shooting a malevolent look at Harry, Ron and Hermione, who were now dawdling around the foot of the stairs as Ron pretended to do up his shoelace. "But I daresay the Ministry of Magic will track him down soon enough."
"I doubt it," shouted tiny Professor Marchbanks, "not if Dumbledore doesn't want to be found! I
did things with a wand I'd never seen before."
"Yes... well..." said Professor Umbridge as Harry, Ron and Hermione dragged their feet up the
marble staircase as slowly as they dared, "let me show you to the staff room. I daresay you'd like a cup of tea after your journey."
she said, "You may begin," and turned over an enormous hour-glass on the desk beside her, on
"Well, it wasn't too bad, was it?" asked Hermione anxiously in the Entrance Hall two hours later, still clutching the exam paper. "I'm not sure I did myself justice on Cheering Charms, I just ran out of time. Did you put in the counter-charm for hiccoughs? I wasn't, sure whether I ought to, it felt like too much - and on question twenty-three -"
"Hermione," said Ron sternly, "we've been through this before... we're not going through every
exam afterwards, it's bad enough doing them once."
"She'll be fine, remember she got a hundred and twelve percent on one of our Charms tests?"
Ten minutes later, Professor Flitwick called, "Parkinson, Pansy - Patil, Padma - Patil, Parvati -
Potter, Harry."
"Good luck," said Ron quietly. Harry walked into the Great Hall, clutching his wand so tightly
"Professor Tofty is free, Potter," squeaked Professor Flitwick, who was standing just inside the
"Potter, is it?" said Professor Tofty, consulting his notes and peering over his pince-nez at Harry
as he approached. "The famous Potter?"
"That's it," he said in his quavery old voice, "no need to be nervous. Now, if I could ask you to
take this egg cup and make it do some cartwheels for me."
"Oh, bravo!" cried Professor Tofty, who was examining Harry again, when Harry demonstrated a perfect Boggart banishing spell. "Very good indeed! Well, I think that's all, Potter... unless..."
"I heard, from my dear friend Tiberius Ogden, that you can produce a Patronus? For a bonus
point...?"
"Expecto patronum!"
"Excellent!" he said. "Very well, Potter, you may go!"
"How were the Runes?" said Ron, yawning and stretching.
"I mistranslated ehwaz," said Hermione furiously. "It means partnership, not Defense; I mixed it
up with eihwaz."
"Ah well," said Ron lazily, "that's only one mistake, isn't it, you'll still get -"
"Oh, shut up!" said Hermione angrily. "It could be the one mistake that makes the difference
shrieking her head off - by the sound of it, it tried to take a chunk out of her leg -"
"Good," said Harry and Ron together.
"It is not good!" said Hermione hotly. "She thinks it's Hagrid doing it, remember? And we do not want Hagrid chucked out!"
"He's teaching at the moment; she can't blame him," said Harry, gesturing out of the window.
"Oh, you're so naive sometimes, Harry.You really think Umbridge will wait for proof?" said
"Such a lovely, sweet-tempered girl," said Ron, very quietly, prodding his queen forward to beat
him during a Potions class. When Professor Marchbanks said, "Step away from your cauldrons,
please, the examination is over," Harry corked his sample flask feeling that he might not have
"Only four exams left," said Parvati Patil wearily as they headed back to Gryffindor common
"Only!" said Hermione snappishly. "I've got Arithmancy and it's probably the toughest subject
there is!"
"Well, we were always going to fail that one," said Ron gloomily as they ascended the marble
"We shouldn't have taken the stupid subject in the first place," said Harry.
"Still, at least we can give it up now."
"Yeah," said Harry. "No more pretending we care what happens when Jupiter and Uranus get too
friendly."
"And from now on, I don't care if my tea-leaves spell die, Ron, die - I'm just chucking them in
the bin where they belong."
"Well, I think I've done all right in Arithmancy" she said, and Harry and Ron both sighed with
relief. "Just time for a quick look over our star-charts before dinner, then..."
"Try and concentrate, now, boys and girls," he said softly.
"Ahem - twenty minutes to go," said Professor Tofty.
"No!" cried Hermione.
"My dear!" said Professor Tofty in a scandalised voice. "This is an examination!"
grounds; a man yelled, "Be reasonable, Hagrid!"
Hagrid roared, "Reasonable be damned, yeh won' take me like this, Dawlish!"
"Look!" squealed Parvati, who was leaning over the parapet and pointing to the foot of the castle
"Now, really!" said Professor Tofty anxiously. "Only sixteen minutes left, you know!"
"How dare you!" the figure shouted as she ran. "How dare you!"
"It's McGonagall!" whispered Hermione.
"Leave him alone! Alone, I say!" said Professor McGonagall's voice through the darkness. "On
what grounds are you attacking him? He has done nothing, nothing to warrant such -"
"Galloping gargoyles!" shouted Professor Tofty, who seemed to have forgotten the exam
completely. "Not so much as a warning! Outrageous behavior!"
"COWARDS!" bellowed Hagrid, his voice carring clearly to the top of the tower, and several
lights flickered back on inside the castle. "RUDDY COWARDS! HAVE SOME O' THAT - AN' THAT -"
"Oh my --" gasped Hermione.
"Get him, get him!" screamed Umbridge, but her remaining helper seemed highly reluctant to go
Then Professor Tofty's voice said feebly, "Um... five minutes to go, everybody."
"That evil woman!" gasped Hermione, who seemed to be having difficulty talking due to rage.
"Trying to sneak up on Hagrid in the dead of night!"
"She clearly wanted to avoid another scene like Trelawney's," said Ernie Macmillan sagely,
"Hagrid did well, didn't he?" said Ron, who looked more alarmed than impressed. "How come all the spells bounced off him?"
"It'll be his giant blood," said Hermione shakily. "Its very hard to Stun a giant, they're like trolls,
exactly young, is she?"
"Dreadful, dreadful," said Ernie, shaking his head pompously. "Well, I'm off to bed. Night, all."
"At least they didn't get to take Hagrid off to Azkaban," said Ron. "I 'spect he's gone to join
Dumbledore, hasn't he?"
"I suppose so," said Hermione, who looked tearful. "Oh, this is awful, I really thought
Dumbledore would be back before long, but now we've lost Hagrid too."
"But why sack Hagrid now?" asked Angelina Johnson, shaking her head. "It's not like
Trelawney; he's been teaching much better than usual this year!"
"Umbridge hates part-humans," said Hermione bitterly, flopping down into an armchair. "She
was always going to try and get Hagrid out."
"And she thought Hagrid was putting Nifflers in her office," piped up Katie Bell.
"Oh, blimey," said Lee Jordan, covering his mouth. "It's me who's been putting the Nifflers in
her office. Fred and George left me a couple; I've been levitating them in through her window."
"She'd have sacked him anyway" said Dean. "He was too close to Dumbledore."
"That's true," said Harry, sinking into an armchair beside Hermione's.
"I just hope Professor McGonagall's all right," said Lavender tearfully.
"They carried her back up to the castle, we watched through the dormitory window," said Colin
Creevey "She didn't look very well."
"Madam Pomfrey will sort her out," said Alicia Spinnet firmly. "She's never failed yet."
"Turn over your papers," said Professor Marchbanks from the front of the Hall, flicking over the
giant hour-glass. "You may begin."
"Take it for me... lift it down, now... I cannot touch it... but you can"
wand rise at the end of his own arm... heard the high, cold voice say "Crucio!"
"Lord Voldemort is waiting"
"You'll have to kill me," whispered Sirius.
"Undoubtedly I shall in the end," said the cold voice. "But you will fetch it for me first, Black...
hear you scream..."
"I'm not going... I don't need the hospital wing... I don't want"
"I'm - I'm fine, sir," Harry stammered, wiping the sweat from his face. "Really... I just fell
asleep... had a nightmare..."
"Pressure of examinations!" said the old wizard sympathetically, patting Harry shakily on the
shoulder. "It happens, young man, it happens! Now, a cooling drink of water, and perhaps you
round off your last answer nicely?"
"Yes," said Harry wildly. "I mean... no... I've done - done as much as I can, I think..."
"Very well, very well," said the old wizard gently. "I shall go and collect your examination paper
and I suggest that you go and have a nice lie down."
"I'll do that," said Harry, nodding vigorously. "Thanks very much."
"Potter, what do you think you're doing?"
"I need to see Professor McGonagall," gasped Harry, the breath tearing his lungs. "Now... it's
urgent!"
"She's not here, Potter," said Madam Pomfrey sadly. "She was transferred to St. Mungo's this
morning. Four Stunning Spells straight to the chest at her age? It's a wonder they didn't kill her."
"She's... gone?" said Harry, shocked.
"I don't wonder you're shocked, Potter," said Madam Pomfrey, with a kind of fierce approval in
her face. "As if one of them could have Stunned Minerva McGonagall face-on by daylight!
to you students without me, I'd resign in protest."
"Yes," said Harry blankly.
"Harry!" said Hermione at once, looking very frightened. "What happened? Are you all right?
Are you ill?"
"Where have you been?" demanded Ron.
"Come with me," Harry said quickly. "Come on, I've got to tell you something."
"Voldemort's got Sirius."
"What?"
"How d'you -?"
"Saw it. Just now. When I fell asleep in the exam."
"But - but where? How?" said Hermione, whose face was white.
"I dunno how," said Harry. "But I know exactly where. There's a room in the Department of
Mysteries full of shelves covered in these little glass balls and they're at the end of row ninety-seven... he's trying to use Sirius to get whatever it is he wants from in there... he's torturing him... says he'll end by killing him!"
"How're we going to get there?" he asked them.
There was a moment's silence. Then Ron said, "G-get there?"
"Get to the Department of Mysteries, so we can rescue Sirius!" Harry said loudly.
"But - Harry..." said Ron weakly.
"What? What?" said Harry.
"Harry," said Hermione in a rather frightened voice, "er... how... how did Voldemort get into the Ministry of Magic without anybody realizing he was there?"
"How do I know?" bellowed Harry. "The question is how we're going to get in there!"
"But... Harry, think about this," said Hermione, taking a step towards him, "it's five o'clock in
the world... you think they could get into a building full of Aurors undetected?"
"I dunno, Voldemort used an Invisibility Cloak or something!" Harry shouted. "Anyway, the
Department of Mysteries has always been completely empty whenever I've been -"
"You've never been there, Harry," said Hermione quietly. "You've dreamed about the place,
that's all."
"They're not normal dreams!" Harry shouted in her face, standing up and taking a step closer to
her in turn. He wanted to shake her. "How d'you explain Ron's dad then, what was all that about,
how come I knew what had happened to him?"
"He's got a point," said Ron quietly, looking at Hermione.
"But this is just -- just sounds unlikely." said Hermione desperately. "Harry, how on earth could Voldemort have got hold of Sirius when he's been in Grimmauld Place all the time?"
"Sirius might've cracked and just wanted some fresh air," said Ron, sounding worried. "He's
been desperate to get out of that house for ages -"
"But why," Hermione persisted, "why on earth would Voldemort want to use Sirius to get the
weapon, or whatever the thing is?"
"I dunno, there could be loads of reasons!" Harry yelled at her. "Maybe Sirius is just someone
Voldemort doesn't care about seeing hurt -"
"You know what, I've just thought of something," said Ron in a hushed voice. "Sirius's brother
was a Death Eater, wasn't he? Maybe he told Sirius the secret of how to get the weapon!"
"Yeah - and that's why Dumbledore's been so keen to keep Sirius locked up all the time!" said
"Look, I'm sorry," cried Hermione, "but neither of you is making sense, and we've got no proof
for any of this, no proof Voldemort and Sirius are even there -"
"Hermione, Harrys seen them!" said Ron, rounding on her.
"Okay," she said, looking frightened yet determined, "I've just got to say this -"
"What?"
"You... this isn't a criticism, Harry! But you do... sort of... I mean - don't you think you've got
a bit of a - a -saving-people thing!" she said.
"And what's that supposed to mean, 'a -saving-people thing'?"
"Well... you..." she looked more apprehensive than ever. "I mean... last year, for instance... in
little Delacour girl... you got a bit... carried away..."
"I mean, it was really great of you and everything," said Hermione quickly, looking positively
petrified at the look on Harrys face, "everyone thought it was a wonderful thing to do -"
"That's funny," said Harry through gritted teeth, "because I definitely remember Ron saying I'd
again?"
"No, no, no!" said Hermione, looking aghast. "That's not what I mean at all!"
"Well, spit out what you've got to say, because we're wasting time here!" Harry shouted.
"I'm trying to say - Voldemort knows you, Harry! He took Ginny down into the Chamber of
who'd go to Sirius's aid! What if he's just trying to get you into the Department of Myst--?"
"Hermione, it doesn't matter if he's done it to get me there or not - they've taken McGonagall to
go, Sirius is dead!"
"But Harry - what if your dream was - was just that, a dream?"
"You don't get it!" Harry shouted at her, "I'm not having nightmares, I'm not just dreaming!
from the Dementors, or -" he rounded on Ron "- when it was your sister I was saving from the
Basilisk -"
"I never said I had a problem!" said Ron heatedly.
"But Harry, you've just said it," said Hermione fiercely, "Dumbledore wanted you to learn to shut these things out of your mind, if you'd done Occlumency properly you'd never have seen this -"
"IF YOU THINK I'M JUST GOING TO ACT LIKE I HAVEN'T SEEN -"
"Sirius told you there was nothing more important than you learning to close your mind!"
"WELL, I EXPECT HE'D SAY SOMETHING DIFFERENT IF HE KNEW WHAT I'D JUST-"
"Hi," said Ginny uncertainly. "We recognized Harry's voice. What are you yelling about?"
"Never you mind," said Harry roughly.
"There's no need to take that tone with me," she said coolly, "I was only wondering whether I
could help."
"Well, you can't," said Harry shortly.
"You're being rather rude, you know," said Luna serenely.
"Wait," said Hermione suddenly. "Wait... Harry, they can help."
"Listen," she said urgently, "Harry, we need to establish whether Sirius really has left
Headquarters."
"I've told you, I saw -"
"Harry, I'm begging you, please!" said Hermione desperately. "Please let's just check that Sirius
won't try to stop you. I'll come, I'll d - do whatever it takes to try and save him."
"Sirius is being tortured NOW!" shouted Harry. "We haven't got time to waste."
"But if this is a trick of Voldemort's, Harry, we've got to check, we've got to."
"How?" Harry demanded. "How're we going to check?"
"We'll have to use Umbridge's fire and see if we can contact him," said Hermione, who looked
positively terrified at the thought. "We'll draw Umbridge away again, but we'll need lookouts,
and that's where we can use Ginny and Luna."
Though clearly struggling to understand what was going on, Ginny said immediately, "Yeah,
we'll do it," and Luna said, "When you say 'Sirius', are you talking about Stubby Boardman?"
"Okay," Harry said aggressively to Hermione, "Okay, if you can think of a way of doing this quickly, I'm with you, otherwise I'm going to the Department of Mysteries right now."
"The Department of Mysteries?" said Luna, looking mildly surprised. "But how are you going to
get there?"
"Right," said Hermione, twisting her hands together and pacing up and down between the desks.
"Right... well... one of us has to go and find Umbridge and - and send her off in the wrong
something awful as usual"
"I'll do it," said Ron at once. "I'll tell her Peeves is smashing up the Transfiguration department
Peeves to do it if I met him on the way."
"Okay," she said, her brow furrowed as she continued to pace. "Now, we need to keep students
right away from her office while we force entry, or some Slytherins bound to go and tip her off."
"Luna and I can stand at either end of the corridor," said Ginny promptly, "and warn people not to go down there because someone's let off a load of Garrotting Gas." Hermione looked surprised at the readiness with which Ginny had come up with this lie; Ginny shrugged and said, "Fred and George were planning to do it before they left."
"Okay," said Hermione. "Well then, Harry, you and I will be under the Invisibility Cloak and we'll sneak into the office and you can talk to Sirius -"
"He's not there, Hermione!"
"I mean, you can - can check whether Sirius is at home or not while I keep watch, I don't think
Nifflers through it."
"I... okay, thanks," he muttered.
"Right, well, even if we do all of that, I don't think we're going to be able to bank on more than
five minutes," said Hermione, looking relieved that Harry seemed to have accepted the plan, "not
with Filch and the wretched Inquisitorial Squad floating around."
"Five minutes'll be enough," said Harry. "C'mon, let's go -"
"Now?" said Hermione, looking shocked.
"Of course now!" said Harry angrily. "What did you think, we're going to wait until after dinner
or something? Hermione, Sirius is being tortured right now!"
"I - oh, all right," she said desperately. "You go and get the Invisibility Cloak and we'll meet you
at the end of Umbridge's corridor, okay?"
"Harry, d'you want to chip in a couple of Galleons? Harold Dingle reckons he could sell us some
Firewhisky -"
"Got it," he panted. "Ready to go, then?"
"All right," whispered Hermione as a gang of loud sixth-years passed them. "So Ron - you go and head Umbridge off... Ginny, Luna, if you can start moving people out of the corridor... Harry and I will get the Cloak on and wait until the coast is clear..."
"Get over here," muttered Hermione, tugging at Harry's wrist and pulling him back into a recess
where the ugly stone head of a medieval wizard stood muttering to itself on a column. "Are - are
you sure you're okay, Harry? You're still very pale."
"I'm fine," he said shortly, tugging the Invisibil i ty Cloak from out of his bag. In truth, his scar
"Here," he said; he threw the Invisibility Cloak over both of them and they stood listening
"You can't come down here!" Ginny was calling to the crowd. "No, sorry, you're going to have
to go round by the swivelling staircase, someone's let off Garrotting Gas just along here -"
They could hear people complaining; one surly voice said, "I can't see no gas."
"That's because it's colorless," said Ginny in a convincingly exasperated voice, "but if you want to walk through it, carry on, then we'll have your body as proof for the next idiot who doesn't believe us."
Hermione said quietly, "I think that's as good as we're going to get, Harry -- come on, let's do
it."
end of the corridor. As they passed Ginny, Hermione whispered, "Good one... don't forget the
signal."
"What's the signal?" muttered Harry, as they approached Umbridge's door.
"A loud chorus of 'Weasly is our King' if they see Umbridge coming," replied Hermione, as Harry inserted the blade of Sirius's knife in the crack between door and wall. The lock clicked open and they entered the office.
"I thought she might have added extra security after the second Niffler."
knelt down quickly, thrust his head into the dancing fire and cried, "Number twelve, Grimmauld
Place!"
"Sirius?" he shouted. "Sirius, are you there?"
"Who's there?" he called, wondering whether it was just a mouse.
"It's the Potter boy's head in the fire," Kreacher informed the empty kitchen, stealing furtive,
oddly triumphant glances at Harry. "What has he come for, Kreacher wonders?"
"Where's Sirius, Kreacher?" Harry demanded.
"Master has gone out, Harry Potter."
"Where's he gone? Where's he gone, Kreacher?"
"I'm warning you!" said Harry, fully aware that his scope for inflicting punishment upon
Kreacher was almost non-existent in this position. "What about Lupin? Mad-Eye? Any of them,
are any of them there?"
"Nobody here but Kreacher!" said the elf gleefully, and turning away from Harry he began to
walk slowly towards the door at the end of the kitchen. "Kreacher thinks he will have a little chat
keeping him away from her -"
"Where has Sirius gone?" Harry yelled after the elf. "Kreacher, has he gone to the Department of
Mysteries?"
"Master does not tell poor Kreacher where he is going," said the elf quietly.
"But you know!" shouted Harry. "Don't you? You know where he is!"
"Master will not come back from the Department of Mysteries!" he said gleefully. "Kreacher and
his mistress are alone again!"
"You -!"
"You think," she whispered, bending Harry's neck back even further, so that he was looking up at the ceiling, "that after two Nifflers I was going to let one more foul, scavenging little creature
doorway after the last one got in, you foolish boy. Take his wand," she barked at someone he
"Hers, too."
"I want to know why you are in my office," said Umbridge, shaking the fist clutching his hair so
"I was - trying to get my Firebolt!" Harry croaked.
"Liar." She shook his head again. "Your Firebolt is under strict guard in the dungeons, as you
communicating?"
"No one -" said Harry, trying to pull away from her. He felt several hairs part company with his
"Liar!" shouted Umbridge. She threw him from her and he slammed into the desk. Now he could see Hermione pinioned against the wall by Millicent Bulstrode. Malfoy was leaning on the
"Got 'em all," said Warrington, shoving Ron roughly forwards into the room. "That one," he
poked a thick finger at Neville, "tried to stop me taking her," he pointed at Ginny, who was trying to kick the shins of the large Slytherin girl holding her, "so I brought him along too."
"Good, good," said Umbridge, watching Ginny's struggles. "Well, it looks as though Hogwarts
will shortly be a Weasley-free zone, doesn't it?"
"So, Potter," she said. "You stationed lookouts around my office and you sent this buffoon," she
nodded at Ron -- Malfoy laughed even louder - "to tell me the poltergeist was wreaking havoc in the Transfiguration department when I knew perfectly well that he was busy smearing ink on the eyepieces of all the school telescopes - Mr. Filch having just informed me so.
"Clearly, it was very important for you to talk to somebody. Was it Albus Dumbledore? Or the
anyone."
"It's none of your business who I talk to," he snarled.
"Very well," she said in her most dangerous and falsely sweet voice. "Very well, Mr Potter... I
Draco fetch Professor Snape."
"You wanted to see me, Headmistress?" said Snape, looking around at all the pairs of struggling
"Ah, Professor Snape," said Umbridge, smiling widely and standing up again. "Yes, I would like
another bottle of Veritaserum, as quick as you can, please."
"You took my last bottle to interrogate Potter," he said, surveying her coolly through his greasy
curtains of black hair. "Surely you did not use it all? I told you that three drops would be
sufficient."
"You can make some more, can't you?" she said, her voice becoming more sweetly girlish as it
"Certainly," said Snape, his lip curling. "It takes a full moon-cycle to mature, so I should have it
ready for you in around a month."
"A month?" squawked Umbridge, swelling toadishly. "A month? But I need it this evening,
unknown!"
"Really?" said Snape, showing his first, faint sign of interest as he looked round at Harry. "Well,
it doesn't surprise me. Potter has never shown much inclination to follow school rules."
"I wish to interrogate him!" repeated Umbridge angrily, and Snape looked away from Harry back into her furiously quivering face. "I wish you to provide me with a potion that will force him to tell me the truth!"
"I have already told you," said Snape smoothly, "that I have no further stocks of Veritaserum.
much time for truth-telling."
"You are on probation!" shrieked Professor Umbridge, and Snape looked back at her, his
eyebrows slightly raised. "You are being deliberately unhelpful! I expected better, Lucius Malfoy always speaks most highly of you! Now get out of my office!"
"He's got Padfoot!" he shouted. "He's got Padfoot at the place where it's hidden!"
"Padfoot?" cried Professor Umbridge, looking eagerly from Harry to Snape. "What is Padfoot?
Where what is hidden? What does he mean, Snape?"
"I have no idea," said Snape coldly. "Potter, when I want nonsense shouted at me I shall give you a Babbling Beverage. And Crabbe, loosen your hold a little. If Longbottom suffocates it will
ever you apply for a job."
"Very well," she said, and she pulled out her wand. "Very well...I am left with no alternative...
this is more than a matter of school discipline...this is an issue of Ministry security...yes...yes..."
"You are forcing me, Potter... I do not want to," said Umbridge, still moving restlessly on the
spot, "but sometimes circumstances justify the use... I am sure the Minister will understand that I had no choice."
"The Cruciatus Curse ought to loosen your tongue," said Umbridge quietly.
"No!" shrieked Hermione. "Professor Umbridge - it's illegal."
"The Minister wouldn't want you to break the law, Professor Umbridge!" cried Hermione.
"What Cornelius doesn't know won't hurt him," said Umbridge, who was now panting slightly as she pointed her wand at different parts of Harry's body in turn, apparently trying to decide where it would hurt most. "He never knew I ordered Dementors to go after Potter last summer, but he was delighted to be given the chance to expel him, all the same."
"It was you!" gasped Harry. "You sent the Dementors after me?"
"Somebody had to act," breathed Umbridge, as her wand came to rest pointing directly at Harrys
forehead. "They were all bleating about silencing you somehow - discrediting you - but I was the one who actually did something about it... only you wriggled out of that one, didn't you, Potter? Not today though, not now -" And taking a deep breath, she cried, "Cruc--"
"NO!" shouted Hermione in a cracked voice from behind Millicent Bulstrode. "No - Harry - we'll have to tell her!"
"No way!" yelled Harry, staring at the little of Hermione he could see.
"We'll have to, Harry, she'll force it out of you anyway, what's... what's the point?"
"Well, well, well!" said Umbridge, looking triumphant. "Little Miss Question-all is going to give
us some answers! Come on then, girl, come on!"
"Er - my - nee - no!" shouted Ron through his gag.
"I'm - I'm sorry everyone," said Hermione. "But - I can't stand it -"
"That's right, that's right, girl!" said Umbridge, seizing Hermione by the shoulders, thrusting her into the abandoned chintz chair and leaning over her. "Now then... with whom was Potter
communicating just now?"
"Well," gulped Hermione into her hands, "well, he was trying to speak to Professor Dumbledore."
"Dumbledore?" said Umbridge eagerly. "You know where Dumbledore is, then?"
"Well... no" sobbed Hermione. "We've tried the Leaky Cauldron in Diagon Alley and the Three
Broomsticks and even the Hog's Head -"
"Idiot girl - Dumbledore won't be sitting in a pub when the whole Ministry's looking for him!"
"But - but we needed to tell him something important!" wailed Hermione, holding her hands
"Yes?" said Umbridge with a sudden resurgence of excitement. "What was it you wanted to tell
him?"
"We... we wanted to tell him it's r - ready!" choked H ermione.
"What's ready?" demanded Umbridge, and now she grabbed Hermione's shoulders again and
shook her slightly. "What's ready, girl?"
"The... the weapon," said Hermione.
"Weapon? Weapon?" said Umbridge, and her eyes seemed to pop with excitement. "You have
Professor Dumbledore's orders, of course?"
"Y -- y - yes," gasped Hermione, "but he had to leave before it was finished and n - n - now
we've finished it for him, and we c - c - can't find him t - t - to tell him!"
"What kind of weapon is it?" said Umbridge harshly, her stubby hands still tight on Hermione's
"We don't r - r - really understand it," said Hermione, sniffing loudly. "We j - j - just did what P - P - Professor Dumbledore told us t - t - to do."
"Lead me to the weapon," she said.
"I'm not showing... them," said Hermione shrilly, looking around at the Slytherins through her
"It is not for you to set conditions," said Professor Umbridge harshly.
"Fine," said Hermione, now sobbing into her hands again. "Fine... let them see it, I hope they use it on you! In fact, I wish you'd invite loads and loads of people to come and see! Th - that would serve you right - oh, I'd love it if the wh - whole school knew where it was, and how to u - use it, and then if you annoy any of them they'll be able to s - sort you out!"
"All right, dear, let's make it just you and me... and we'll take Potter, too, shall we? Get up,
now."
"Professor," said Malfoy eagerly, "Professor Umbridge, I think some of the Squad should come
with you to look after -"
"I am a fully qualified Ministry official, Malfoy, do you really think I cannot manage two
wandless teenagers alone?" asked Umbridge sharply. "In any case, it does not sound as though
make sure none of these -" she gestured around at Ron, Ginny, Neville and Luna "- escape."
"All right," said Malfoy, looking sulky and disappointed.
"And you two can go ahead of me and show me the way" said Umbridge, pointing at Harry and
Hermione with her wand. "Lead on."
"It's hidden in Hagrid's hut, is it?" said Umbridge eagerly in Harry's ear.
"Of course not," said Hermione scathingly. "Hagrid might have set it off accidentally"
"Yes," said Umbridge, whose excitement seemed to be mounting. "Yes, he would have done, of
course, the great half-breed oaf."
"Then... where is it?" asked Umbridge, with a hint of uncertainty in her voice as Hermione
"In there, of course," said Hermione, pointing into the dark trees. "It had to be somewhere that
students weren't going to find it accidentally, didn't it?"
"Of course," said Umbridge, though she sounded a little apprehensive now. "Of course... very
well, then... you two stay ahead of me."
"Can we have your wand, then, if we're going first?" Harry asked her.
"No, I don't think so, Mr. Potter," said Umbridge sweetly, poking him in the back with it. "The
Ministry places a rather higher value on my life than yours, I'm afraid."
"Is it very far in?" Umbridge asked, as her robe ripped on a bramble.
"Oh yes," said Hermione, "yes, it's well hidden."
"Er - are you sure this is the right way?" he asked her pointedly.
"Oh yes," she said in a steely voice, crashing through the undergrowth with what he thought was
shoulder, "It's a bit further in!"
"Hermione, keep your voice down," Harry muttered, hurrying to catch up with her. "Anything
could be listening in here -"
"I want us heard," she answered quietly, as Umbridge jogged noisily after them. "You'll see..."
"How much further?" demanded Umbridge angrily from behind him.
"Not far now!" shouted Hermione, as they emerged into a dim, dank clearing. "Just a little bit -"
"Who are you?" said a voice.
"I asked you who are you, human," said Magorian rou ghly.
"I am Dolores Umbridge!" said Umbridge in a high-p i tched, terrified voice. "Senior
Undersecretary to the Minister for Magic and Headmistress and High Inquisitor of Hogwarts!"
"You are from the Ministry of Magic?" said Magorian, as many of the centaurs in the
"That's right!" said Umbridge, in an even higher voice, "so be very careful! By the laws laid
half-breeds such as yourselves on a human -"
"What did you call us?" shouted a wild-looking black centaur, whom Harry recognized as Bane.
"Don't call them that!" Hermione said furiously, but Umbridge did not appear to have heard her.
Still pointing her shaking wand at Magorian, she continued, "Law Fifteen 'B' states clearly that
considered responsible for its actions' --"
"'Near-human intelligence'?" repeated Magorian, as Bane and several others roared with rage and pawed the ground. "We consider that a great insult, human! Our intelligence, thankfully, far
outstrips your own."
"What are you doing in our Forest?" bellowed the hard-faced grey centaur Harry and Hermione
had seen on their last trip into the Forest. "Why are you here?"
"Your Forest?" said Umbridge, shaking now not only with fright but also, it seemed, with
indignation. "I would remind you that you live here only because the Ministry of Magic permits
you certain areas of land -"
"Whose Forest is it now, human?" bellowed Bane.
"Filthy half-breeds!" she screamed, her hands still tight over her head. "Beasts! Uncontrolled
animals!"
"Be quiet!" shouted Hermione, but it was too late: Umbridge pointed her wand at Magorian and
screamed, "Incarcerous!"
"Nooooo!" he heard Umbridge shriek. "Noooooo... I am Senior Undersecretary... you cannot -
Unhand me, you animals... nooooo!"
"Now!" roared a voice in Harry's ear and a thick hairy arm descended from thin air and dragged
"And these?" said the hard-faced, grey centaur holding Hermione.
"They are young," said a slow, doleful voice from behind Harry. "We do not attack foals."
"They brought her here, Ronan," replied the centaur who had such a firm grip on Harry. "And
they are not so young... he is nearing manhood, this one."
"Please," said Hermione breathlessly, "please, don't attack us, we don't think like her, we aren't
us."
stamping furiously, and bellowed, "You see, Ronan? They already have the arrogance of their
drive away your enemies like obedient hounds?"
"No!" said Hermione in a horrorstruck squeak. "Please - I didn't mean that! I just hoped you'd be able to - to help us -"
"We do not help humans!" snarled the centaur holding Harry, tightening his grip and rearing a
little at the same time, so that Harry's feet left the ground momentarily. "We are a race apart and
proud to be so. We will not permit you to walk from here, boasting that we did your bidding!"
"We're not going to say anything like that!" Harry shouted. "We know you didn't do what you
did because we wanted you to -"
A bearded centaur towards the back of the crowd shouted, "They came here unasked, they must
pay the consequences!"
A roar of approval met these words and a dun-colored centaur shouted, "They can join the
woman!"
"You said you didn't hurt the innocent!" shouted Hermione, real tears sliding down her face now. "We haven't done anything to hurt you, we haven't used wands or threats, we just want to go back to school, please let us go back -"
"We are not all like the traitor Firenze, human girl!" shouted the grey centaur, to more neighing
roars of approval from his fellows. "Perhaps you thought us pretty talking horses? We are an
we do not acknowledge your superiority, we are -"
"Hagger."
"Hagger!" he said again, more insistently.
"Get away from here, giant!" called Magorian. "You are not welcome among us!"
centaurs' arms tensed on their bows), then bellowed, "HAGGER!"
"Harry!" she whispered. "I think he's trying to say 'Hagrid'!"
shaking as Grawp opened his mouth wide again and said, in a deep, rumbling voice, "Hermy."
"Goodness," said Hermione, gripping Harry's arm so tightly it was growing numb and looking as
though she was about to faint, "he - he remembered!"
"HERMY!" roared Grawp. "WHERE HAGGER?"
"I don't know!" squealed Hermione, terrified. "I'm sorry, Grawp, I don't know!"
"GRAWP WANT HAGGER!"
"Oh no," said Hermione, quaking so badly that her knees gave way. "Oh, that was horrible. And
he might kill them all."
"I'm not that fussed, to be honest," said Harry bitterly.
"Smart plan," he spat at Hermione, having to release some of his fury. "Really smart plan. Where
do we go from here?"
"We need to get back up to the castle," said Hermione faintly.
"By the time we've done that, Sirius'll probably be dead!" said Harry, kicking a nearby tree in
"Well, we can't do anything without wands," said Hermione hopelessly, dragging herself up
again. "Anyway, Harry, how exactly were you planning to get all the way to London?"
"Yeah, we were just wondering that," said a familiar voice from behind her.
"So," said Ron, pushing aside a low-hanging branch and holding out Harry's wand, "had any
ideas?"
"How did you get away?" asked Harry in amazement, taking his wand from Ron.
"Couple of Stunners, a Disarming Charm, Neville brought off a really nice little Impediment
Jinx," said Ron airily, now handing back Hermione's wand, too. "But Ginny was best, she got
with Umbridge?"
"She got carried away," said Harry. "By a herd of centaurs."
"And they left you behind?" asked Ginny, looking astonished.
"No, they got chased off by Grawp," said Harry
"Who's Grawp?" Luna asked interestedly.
"Hagrid's little brother," said Ron promptly. "Anyway, never mind that now. Harry, what did you find out in the fire? Has You-Know-Who got Sirius or -?"
"Yes," said Harry, as his scar gave another painful prickle, "and I'm sure Sirius is still alive, but I can't see how we're going to get there to help him."
"Well, we'll have to fly, won't we?" said Luna, in the closest thing to a matter-of-fact voice
"Okay," said Harry irritably, rounding on her. "First of all, 'we' aren't doing anything if you're
being guarded by a security troll, so -"
"I've got a broom!" said Ginny.
"Yeah, but you're not coming," said Ron angrily.
"Excuse me, but I care what happens to Sirius as much as you do!" said Ginny, her jaw set so that her resemblance to Fred and George was suddenly striking.
"You're too -" Harry began, but Ginny said fiercely, "I'm three years older than you were when
stuck back in Umbridge's office with giant flying bogies attacking him -"
"Yeah, but -"
"We were all in the D.A, together," said Neville quietly. "It was all supposed to be about fighting
that all just a game or something?"
"No -- of course it wasn't -" said Harry impatiently.
"Then we should come too," said Neville simply. "We want to help."
"That's right," said Luna, smiling happily.
"Well, it doesn't matter, anyway," said Harry through gritted teeth, "because we still don't know
how to get there -"
"I thought we'd settled that," said Luna maddeningly. "We're flying!"
"Look," said Ron, barely containing his anger, "you might be able to fly without a broomstick but the rest of us can't sprout wings whenever we -"
"There are ways of flying other than with broomsticks," said Luna serenely.
"I s'pose we're going to ride on the back of the Kacky Snorgle or whatever it is?" Ron
"The Crumple-Horned Snorkack can't fly," said Luna in a dignified voice, "but they can, and
Hagrid says they're very good at finding places their riders are looking for."
"Yes!" he whispered, moving towards them. They tossed their reptilian heads, throwing back
"Is it those mad horse things?" said Ron uncertainly, staring at a point slightly to the left of the
Thestral Harry was patting. "Those ones you can't see unless you've watched someone snuff it?"
"Yeah," said Harry.
"How many?"
"Just two."
"Well, we need three," said Hermione, who was still looking a little shaken, but determined just
"Four, Hermione," said Ginny, scowling.
"I think there are six of us, actually," said Luna calmly, counting.
"Don't be stupid, we can't all go!" said Harry angrily. "Look, you three -" he pointed at Neville,
Ginny and Luna, "you're not involved in this, you're not -"
"Okay, fine, it's your choice," he said curtly, "but unless we can find more Thestrals you're not
going to be able -"
"Oh, more of them will come," said Ginny confidently, who like Ron was squinting in quite the
"What makes you think that?"
"Because, in case you hadn't noticed, you and Hermione are both covered in blood," she said
coolly, "and we know Hagrid lures Thestrals with raw meat. That's probably why these two
turned up in the first place."
"Okay, then," he said, a bright idea occurring, "Ron and I will take these two and go ahead, and
Hermione can stay here with you three and she'll attract more Thestrals -"
"I'm not staying behind!" said Hermione furiously.
"There's no need," said Luna, smiling. "Look, here come more now... you two must really
smell..."
"All right," he said angrily, "pick one and get on, then."
"What?" he said.
"How're we supposed to get on?" said Ron faintly. "When we can't see the things?"
"Oh, it's easy," said Luna, sliding obligingly from her Thestral and marching over to him,
Hermione and Ginny. "Come here..."
"This is mad," Ron murmured, moving his free hand gingerly up and down his horse's neck.
"Mad... if I could just see it -"
"You'd better hope it stays invisible," said Harry darkly. "We all ready, then?"
"Okay..."
"Ministry of Magic, visitors' entrance, London, then," he said uncertainly. "Er... if you know...
where to go..."
"This is bizarre!" Harry barely heard Ron yell from somewhere behind him, and he imagined
"Never again," he said, struggling to his feet. He made as though to stride away from his
Thestral, but, unable to see it, collided with its hindquarters and almost fell over again. "Never,
ever again... that was the worst -"
"Where do we go from here, then?" she asked Harry in a politely interested voice, as though this
"Over here," he said. He gave his Thestral a quick, grateful pat, then led the way quickly to the
battered telephone box and opened the door. "Come on!" he urged the others, as they hesitated.
"Whoever's nearest the receiver, dial six two four four two!" he said.
"Welcome to the Ministry of Magic. Please state your name and business."
"Harry Potter, Ron Weasley, Hermione Granger," Harry said very quickly, "Ginny Weasley,
do it first!"
"Thank you," said the cool female voice. "Visitors, please take the badges and attach them to the
front of your robes."
"Visitors to the Ministry, you are required to submit to a search and present your wands for
registration at the security desk, which is located at the far end of the Atrium."
"Fine!" Harry said loudly, as his scar gave another throb. "Now can we move?"
"The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasant evening," said the woman's voice.
"Come on," said Harry quietly and the six of them sprinted off down the hall, Harry in the lead,
lift halted, the cool female voice said, "Department of Mysteries," and the grilles slid open. They
"Let's go," he whispered, and he led the way down t he corridor, Luna right behind him, gazing
"Okay, listen," said Harry stopping again within six feet of the door. "Maybe... maybe a couple of people should stay here as a -- as a lookout, and --"
"And how're we going to let you know something's coming?" asked Ginny, her eyebrows raised.
"You could be miles away."
"We're coming with you, Harry," said Neville.
"Let's get on with it," said Ron firmly.
"Someone shut the door," Harry muttered.
"What was that about?" whispered Ron fearfully.
"I think it was to stop us knowing which door we came in through," said Ginny in a hushed
"How're we going to get back out?" said Neville uncomfortably.
"Well, that doesn't matter now," said Harry forcefully, blinking to try to erase the blue lines from his vision, and clutching his wand tighter than ever, "we won't need to get out till we've found Sirius -"
"Don't go calling for him, though!" Hermione said urgently; but Harry had never needed her
"Where do we go, then, Harry?" Ron asked.
"I don't -" Harry began. He swallowed. "In the dreams I went through the door at the end of the
into a room that kind of... glitters. We should try a few doors," he said hastily, "I'll know the
right way when I see it. C'mon."
"What're those things?" whispered Ron.
"Dunno," said Harry.
"Are they fish?" breathed Ginny.
"Aquavirius Maggots!" said Luna excitedly. "Dad said the Ministry were breeding --"
"No," said Hermione. She sounded odd. She moved forward to look through the side of the tank.
"They're brains."
"Brains?"
"Yes... I wonder what they're doing with them?"
"Let's get out of here," said Harry. "This isn't right, we need to try another door."
"There are doors here, too," said Ron, pointing around the walls. Harry's heart sank; how big was this place?
"In my dream I went through that dark room into the second one," he said. "I think we should go
back and try from there."
"Wait!" said Hermione sharply, as Luna made to close the door of the brain room behind them.
"Flagrate!"
"Good thinking," said Harry. "Okay, let's try this one -"
"Who's there?" said Harry, jumping down on to the bench below. There was no answering voice,
"Careful!" whispered Hermione.
"Sirius?" Harry spoke again, but more quietly now that he was nearer.
"Let's go," called Hermione from halfway up the stone steps. "This isn't right, Harry, come on,
let's go."
"Harry, let's go, okay?" said Hermione more forcefully.
"Okay," he said, but did not move. He had just heard something. There were faint whispering,
"What are you saying?" he said, very loudly, so that his words echoed all around the stone
"Nobody's talking, Harry!" said Hermione, now moving over to him.
"Someone's whispering behind there," he said, moving out of her reach and continuing to frown
at the veil. "Is that you, Ron?"
"I'm here, mate," said Ron, appearing around the side of the archway.
"Can't anyone else hear it?" Harry demanded, for the whispering and murmuring was becoming
"I can hear them too," breathed Luna, joining them around the side of the archway and gazing at
the swaying veil. "There are people in there!"
"What do you mean, 'in there'?" demanded Hermione, jumping down from the bottom step and
sounding much angrier than the occasion warranted, "there isn't any 'in there', it's just an archway, there's no room for anybody to be there. Harry, stop it, come away -"
"Harry, we are supposed to be here for Sirius!" she said in a high-pitched, strained voice.
"Sirius," Harry repeated, still gazing, mesmerized, at the continuously swaying veil. "Yeah..."
"Let's go," he said.
"That's what I've been trying to - well, come on, then!" said Hermione, and she led the way back
"What d'you reckon that arch was?" Harry asked Hermione as they regained the dark circular
"I don't know, but whatever it was, it was dangerous," she said firmly, again inscribing a fiery
"What's wrong?" said Hermione.
"It's... locked..." said Harry, throwing his weight at the door, but it didn't budge.
"This is it, then, isn't it?" said Ron excitedly, joining Harry in the attempt to force the door open.
"Bound to be!"
"Get out of the way!" said Hermione sharply. She pointed her wand at the place where a lock
would have been on an ordinary door and said, "Alohomora!"
"Sirius's knife!" said Harry. He pulled it out from inside his robes and slid it into the crack
"Right, we're leaving that room," said Hermione decisively.
"But what if that's the one?" said Ron, staring at it with a mixture of apprehension and longing.
"It can't be, Harry could get through all the doors in his dream," said Hermione, marking the door with another fiery cross as Harry replaced the now-useless handle of Sirius's knife in his pocket.
"You know what could be in there?" said Luna eagerly, as the wall started to spin yet again.
"Something blibbering, no doubt," said Hermione under her breath and Neville gave a nervous
"This is it!"
"This way!"
"Oh, look!" said Ginny, as they drew nearer, pointing at the very heart of the bell jar.
"Keep going!" said Harry sharply, because Ginny showed signs of wanting to stop and watch the
"You dawdled enough by that old arch!" she said crossly, but followed him past the bell jar to the only door behind it.
"This is it," Harry said again, and his heart was now pumping so hard and fast he felt it must
interfere with his speech, "it's through here -"
"You said it was row ninety-seven," whispered Hermione.
"Yeah," breathed Harry, looking up at the end of the closest row. Beneath the branch of blueglowing candles protruding from it glimmered the silver figure fifty-three.
"We need to go right, I think," whispered Hermione, squinting to the next row. "Yes... that's
fifty-four..."
"Keep your wands ready," Harry said softly.
"Ninety-seven!" whispered Hermione.
"He's right down at the end," said Harry, whose mouth had become slightly dry. "You can't see
properly from here."
"He should be near here," whispered Harry, convinced that every step was going to bring the
ragged form of Sirius into view on the darkened floor. "Anywhere here... really close..."
"Harry?" said Hermione tentatively, but he did not want to respond. His mouth was very dry.
"Somewhere about... here..." he said.
"He might be..." Harry whispered hoarsely, peering down the next alley. "Or maybe..." He
"Harry?" said Hermione again.
"What?" he snarled.
"I... I don't think Sirius is here."
"Harry?" Ron called.
"What?"
"Have you seen this?" said Ron,
"What?" said Harry, but eagerly this time - it had to be a sign that Sirius had been there, a clue.
"What?" Harry repeated glumly.
"It's -- it's got your name on," said Ron.
"My name?" said Harry blankly.
"What is it?" Ron asked, sounding unnerved. "What's your name doing down here?"
"I'm not here," he said, sounding perplexed. "None of the rest of us are here."
"Harry, I don't think you should touch it," said Hermione sharply, as he stretched out his hand.
"Why not?" he said. "It's something to do with me, isn't it?"
"Don't, Harry," said Neville suddenly. Harry looked at him. Neville's round face was shining
"It's got my name on," said Harry.
"Very good, Potter. Now turn around, nice and slowly, and give that to me."
"To me, Potter," repeated the drawling voice of Lucius Malfoy as he held out his hand, palm up.
"To me," said Malfoy yet again.
"Where's Sirius?" Harry said.
to Harry's left said triumphantly, "The Dark Lord always knows!"
"Always," echoed Malfoy softly. "Now, give me the prophecy Potter."
"I want to know where Sirius is!"
"I want to know where Sirius is!" mimicked the woman to his left.
"You've got him," said Harry, ignoring the rising panic in his chest, the dread he had been
fighting since they had first entered the ninety-seventh row. "He's here. I know he is."
"The little baby woke up fwightened and fort what it dweamed was twoo," said the woman in a
"Don't do anything," Harry muttered. "Not yet -"
"You hear him? You hear him? Giving instructions to the other children as though he thinks of
fighting us!"
"Oh, you don't know Potter as I do, Bellatrix," said Malfoy softly. "He has a great weakness for
heroics; the Dark Lord understands this about him. Now give me the prophecy, Potter."
"I know Sirius is here," said Harry, though panic w as causing his chest to constrict and he felt as
though he could not breathe properly. "I know you've got him!"
"It's time you learned the difference between life and dreams, Potter," said Malfoy. "Now give
me the prophecy, or we start using wands."
"Go on, then," said Harry, raising his own wand to chest height. As he did so, the five wands of
"Hand over the prophecy and no one need get hurt," said Malfoy coolly.
"Yeah, right!" he said. "I give you this - prophecy, is it? And you'll just let us skip off home, will
you?"
The words were hardly out of his mouth when the female Death Eater shrieked: "Accio proph--"
Harry was just ready for her: he shouted "Protego!" before she had finished her spell, and though
"Oh, he knows how to play, little bitty baby Potter," she said, her mad eyes staring through the
slits in her hood. "Very well, then -"
"I TOLD YOU, NO!" Lucius Malfoy roared at the woman. "If you smash it -!"
"You need more persuasion?" she said, her chest rising and falling rapidly. "Very well - take the
smallest one," she ordered the Death Eaters beside her. "Let him watch while we torture the little
girl. I'll do it."
"You'll have to smash this if you want to attack any of us," he told Bellatrix. "I don't think your
boss will be too pleased if you come back without it, will he?"
"So," said Harry, "what kind of prophecy are we talking about, anyway?"
"What kind of prophecy?" repeated Bellatrix, the grin fading from her face. "You jest, Harry
Potter."
"Nope, not jesting," said Harry, his eyes flicking from Death Eater to Death Eater, looking for a
weak link, a space through which they could escape. "How come Voldemort wants it?"
"You dare speak his name?" whispered Bellatrix.
"Yeah," said Harry, maintaining his tight grip on the glass ball, expecting another attempt to
bewitch it from him. "Yeah, I've got no problem with saying Vol--"
"Shut your mouth!" Bellatrix shrieked. "You dare speak his name with your unworthy lips, you
dare besmirch it with your half-blood's tongue, you dare -"
"Did you know he's a half-blood too?" said Harry recklessly. Hermione gave a little moan in his
ear. "Voldemort? Yeah, his mother was a witch but his dad was a Muggle - or has he been telling
you lot he's pure-blood?"
"STUPEF--"
"NO!"
"... at the solstice will come a new..." said the figure of an old, bearded man.
"DO NOT ATTACK! WE NEED THE PROPHECY!"
"He dared - he dares -" shrieked Bellatrix incoherently, "he stands there - filthy half-blood -"
"WAIT UNTIL WE'VE GOT THE PROPHECY!" bawled Malfoy.
"... and none will come after..." said the figure of a young woman.
"You haven't told me what's so special about this prophecy I'm supposed to be handing over," he said, playing for time. He moved his foot slowly sideways, feeling around for someone else's.
"Do not play games with us, Potter," said Malfoy.
"I'm not playing games," said Harry, half his mind on the conversation, half on his wandering
"What?" she whispered.
"Dumbledore never told you the reason you bear that scar was hidden in the bowels of the
Department of Mysteries?" Malfoy sneered.
"I - what?" said Harry. And for a moment he quite forgot his plan. "What about my scar?"
"What?" whispered Hermione more urgently behind him.
"Can this be?" said Malfoy, sounding maliciously delighted; some of the Death Eaters were
little as possible, "Smash shelves -"
"Dumbledore never told you?" Malfoy repeated. "Well, this explains why you didn't come
earlier, Potter, the Dark Lord wondered why -"
"- when I say now-"
"- you didn't come running when he showed you the place where it was hidden in your dreams.
He thought natural curiosity would make you want to hear the exact wording..."
"Did he?" said Harry. Behind him he felt rather than heard Hermione passing his message to the
others and he sought to keep talking, to distract the Death Eaters. "So he wanted me to come and
get it, did he? Why?"
"Why?" Malfoy sounded incredulously delighted. "Because the only people who are permitted to
made, as the Dark Lord discovered when he attempted to use others to steal it for him."
"And why did he want to steal a prophecy about me?"
"About both of you, Potter, about both of you... haven't you ever wondered why the Dark Lord
tried to kill you as a baby?"
"Someone made a prophecy about Voldemort and me?" he said quietly, gazing at Lucius Malfoy,
and still gritty with dust. "And he's made me come and get it for him? Why couldn't he come
and get it himself?"
"Get it himself?" shrieked Bellatrix, over a cackle of mad laughter. "The Dark Lord, walk into the Ministry of Magic, when they are so sweetly ignoring his return? The Dark Lord, reveal himself to the Aurors, when at the moment they are wasting their time on my dear cousin?"
"So, he's got you doing his dirty work for him, has he?" said Harry. "Like he tried to get Sturgis
to steal it - and Bode?"
"Very good, Potter, very good..." said Malfoy slowly. "But the Dark Lord knows you are not
unintell--"
"NOW!" yelled Harry.
Five different voices behind him bellowed, "REDUCTO!" Five curses flew in five different
"RUN!" Harry yelled, as the shelves swayed precariously and more glass spheres began to fall
and sprinted onwards; a hand caught him by the shoulder; he heard Hermione shout, "Stupefy!"
"Colloportus!" gasped Hermione and the door sealed itself with an odd squelching noise.
"Where - where are the others?" gasped Harry.
"They must have gone the wrong way!" whispered Hermione, terror in her face.
"Listen!" whispered Neville.
the door to listen and heard Lucius Malfoy roar, "Leave Nott, leave him, I say -- his injuries will
through here - Rookwood, over there - Mulciber, come with me!"
"What do we do?" Hermione asked Harry, trembling from head to foot.
"Well, we don't stand here waiting for them to find us, for a start," said Harry. "Let's get away
from this door." They ran as quietly as they could, past the shimmering bell jar where the tiny
"Stand aside!" said a rough voice. "Alahomora!"
"They might've run straight through to the hall," said the rough voice.
"Check under the desks," said another.
shouted, "STUPEFY!"
"Avada -
"EXPELLIARMUS!"
"Get out of the way, Harry!" yelled Neville, clearly determined to repair the damage.
"STUPEFY!"
couldn't see. He ripped it off with his free hand and shouted: "STUP--"
"STUPEFY!" screamed Hermione, who had just caught up with them. The jet of red light hit the
"Accio wand!" cried Hermione. Harry's wand flew from a dark corner into her hand and she
"Thanks," he said. "Right, let's get out of --"
"Look out!" said Neville, horrified. He was staring at the Death Eater's head in the bell jar.
"It's Time," said Hermione in an awestruck voice. "Time..."
"RON?" Harry yelled, turning quickly from the monstrous transformation taking place before
them. "GINNY? LUNA?"
"Harry!" Hermione screamed.
"You can't hurt a baby!"
"Come on!" he said, and leaving the ugly baby-headed Death Eater staggering behind them they
"Collo--" began Hermione, but before she could complete the spell the door had burst open and
"IMPEDIMENTA!"
"WE'VE GOT HIM!" yelled the Death Eater nearest Harry. "IN AN OFFICE OFF--"
"Silencio!" cried Hermione and the man's voice was extinguished. He continued to mouth
"Petrificus Totalus!" shouted Harry, as the second Death Eater raised his wand. His arms and legs snapped together and he fell forwards, face down on to the rug at Harry's feet, stiff as a board and unable to move.
"Well done, Ha--"
a tiny "Oh!" as though of surprise and crumpled on to the floor, where she lay motionless.
"HERMIONE!"
"Like you won't kill us all anyway, the moment I hand it over!" said Harry.
"Whaddever you do, Harry," said Neville fiercely from under the desk, lowering his hands to
show a clearly broken nose and blood pouring down his mouth and chin, "don'd gib it to him!"
"PETRIFICUS TOTALUS!"
"Hermione," Harry said at once, shaking her as the baby-headed Death Eater blundered out of
sight again. "Hermione, wake up..."
"Whad did he do to her?" said Neville, crawling out from under the desk to kneel at her other side, blood streaming from his rapidly swelling nose.
"I dunno..."
"Dat's a pulse, Harry, I'b sure id is."
"She's alive?"
"Yeah, I dink so."
"Neville, we're not far from the exit," Harry whispered, "we're right next to that circular room...
the alarm..."
"And whad are you going do do?" said Neville, mopping his bleeding nose with his sleeve and
"I've got to find the others," said Harry.
"Well, I'b going do find dem wid you," said Neville firmly.
"But Hermione --"
"We'll dake her wid us," said Neville firmly. "I'll carry her -- you're bedder at fighding dem dan I ab -"
"Wait," said Harry, snatching up Hermione's wand from the floor and shoving it into Neville's
hand, "you'd better take this."
"My gran's going do kill be," said Neville thickly, blood spattering from his nose as he spoke,
"dat was by dad's old wand."
"He's never going to notice us," he whispered. "C'mon... keep close behind me..."
"So which way d'you reck--?"
"Ron!" croaked Harry, dashing towards them. "Ginny - are you all -?"
"Harry," said Ron, giggling weakly, lurching forwards, seizing the front of Harry's robes and
gazing at him with unfocused eyes, "there you are... ha ha ha... you look funny, Harry... you're
all messed up..."
"Ginny?" Harry said fearfully. "What happened?"
"I think her ankle's broken, I heard something crack," whispered Luna, who was bending over
her and who alone seemed to be unhurt. "Four of them chased us into a dark room full of planets;
it was a very odd place, some of the time we were just floating in the dark -"
"Harry, we saw Uranus up close!" said Ron, still giggling feebly. "Get it, Harry? We saw Uranus
- ha ha ha -"
"- anyway, one of them grabbed Ginny's foot, I used the Reductor Curse and blew up Pluto in his face, but..."
"And what about Ron?" said Harry fearfully, as Ron continued to giggle, still hanging off the
"I don't know what they hit him with," said Luna sadly, "but he's gone a bit funny, I could hardly get him along at all."
"Harry," said Ron, pulling Harry's ear down to his mouth and still giggling weakly, "you know
who this girl is, Harry? She's Loony... Loony Lovegood... ha ha ha "
"We've got to get out of here," said Harry firmly. "Luna, can you help Ginny?"
"Yes," said Luna, sticking her wand behind her ear for safekeeping, then putting an arm around
"It's only my ankle, I can do it myself!" said Ginny impatiently, but next moment she had
"There they are!" she shrieked.
"Colloportus!" shouted Harry, and he heard three bodies slam into the door on the other side.
"It doesn't matter!" said a man's voice. "There are other ways in - WE'VE GOT THEM,
THEY'RE HERE!"
"Luna - Neville - help me!"
"Colloportus!"
"Collo--aaaaaaaaargh..."
"Get Potter!" shrieked Bellatrix, and she ran at him; he dodged her and sprinted back up the
"Hey!" said Ron, who had staggered to his feet and was now tottering drunkenly towards Harry,
giggling. "Hey Harry, there are brains in here, ha h a ha, isn't that weird, Harry?"
"Ron, get out of the way, get down -"
"Honest, Harry, they're brains - look -Accio brain!"
"Ha ha ha, Harry, look at it -" said Ron, watching it disgorge its gaudy innards, "Harry come and
touch it; bet it's weird -"
"RON, NO!"
"Harry, look what's happen-- No - no - I don't like it - no, stop - stop -"
"Diffindo!" yelled Harry, trying to sever the feelers wrapping themselves tightly around Ron
"Harry, it'll suffocate him!" screamed Ginny, immobilized by her broken ankle on the floor - then a jet of red light flew from one of the Death Eater's wands and hit her squarely in the face. She keeled over sideways and lay there unconscious.
"STUBEFY!" shouted Neville, wheeling around and waving Hermione's wand at the oncoming
Death Eaters, "STUBEFY, STUBEFY!"
"Potter, your race is run," drawled Lucius Malfoy, pulling off his mask, "now hand me the
prophecy like a good boy."
"Let - let the others go, and I'll give it to you!" said Harry desperately.
"You are not in a position to bargain, Potter," said Lucius Malfoy, his pale face flushed with
pleasure. "You see, there are ten of us and only one of you... or hasn't Dumbledore ever taught
you how to count?"
"He's dot alone!" shouted a voice from above them. "He's still god be!"
"Neville - no - go back to Ron -"
"STUBEFY!" Neville shouted again, pointing his wand at each Death Eater in turn. "STUBEFY!
STUBE--"
"It's Longbottom, isn't it" sneered Lucius Malfoy. "Well, your grandmother is used to losing
family members to our cause... your death will not come as a great shock."
"Longbottom?" repeated Bellatrix, and a truly evil smile lit her gaunt face. "Why, I have had the
pleasure of meeting your parents, boy,"
"I DOE YOU HAB!" roared Neville, and he fought so hard against his captors encircling grip
that the Death Eater shouted, "Someone Stun him!"
"No, no, no," said Bellatrix. She looked transported, alive with excitement as she glanced at
Harry, then back at Neville. "No, let's see how long Longbottom lasts before he cracks like his
parents... unless Potter wants to give us the prophecy."
"DON'D GIB ID DO DEM!" roared Neville, who seemed beside himself, kicking and writhing
as Bellatrix drew nearer to him and his captor, her wand raised. "DON'D GIB ID DO DEM,
HARRY!"
Bellatrix raised her wand. "Crucio!"
"That was just a taster!" said Bellatrix, raising her wand so that Neville's screams stopped and he
lay sobbing at her feet. She turned and gazed up at Harry. "Now, Potter, either give us the
prophecy, or watch your little friend die the hard way!"
"Are you okay?" he yelled, as another spell soared inches over their heads.
"Yes," said Neville, trying to pull himself up.
"And Ron?"
"I dink he's all righd - he was still fighding de brain when I lefd -"
"Give it to me," growled a voice in his ear, "give me the prophecy -"
"AARGH!"
"STUPEFY!"
"Thanks!" Harry said to Neville, pulling him aside as Sirius and his Death Eater lurched past,
"Tarantallegra!" he shouted, his wand pointing at Neville, whose legs went immediately into a
kind of frenzied tap-dance, unbalancing him and causing him to fall to the floor again. "Now,
Potter -"
yelled, "Protego!"
Dolohov raised his wand again. "Accio proph--"
Hermione. Springing up, Harry yelled, "Petrificus Totalus!" Once again, Dolohov's arms and
"Nice one!" shouted Sirius, forcing Harry's head down as a pair of Stunning Spells flew towards
them. "Now I want you to get out of-"
"Harry, take the prophecy, grab Neville and run!" Sirius yelled, dashing to meet Bellatrix. Harry
"Can you stand?" he bellowed in Neville's ear, as Neville's legs jerked and twitched
uncontrollably. "Put your arm round my neck -"
"The prophecy, give me the prophecy, Potter!" snarled Lucius Malfoy's voice in his ear, and
"No - get - off - me... Neville - catch it!"
back over his shoulder and yelled, "Impedimenta!"
"Harry, round up the others and GO!"
"Come on!" said Harry desperately, hauling at Neville's robes. "Just try and push with your legs"
"Harry, I'b sorry!" cried Neville, his face anguished as his legs continued to flounder. "I'b so
sorry, Harry, I didn'd bean do -"
"It doesn't matter!" Harry shouted. "Just try and stand, let's get out of -"
"Dubbledore!" said Neville, his sweaty face suddenly transported, staring over Harry's shoulder.
"What?"
"DUBBLEDORE!"
"Come on, you can do better than that!" he yelled, his voice echoing around the cavernous room.
"SIRIUS!" Harry yelled. "SIRIUS!"
"There's nothing you can do, Harry -"
"Get him, save him, he's only just gone through!"
"- it's too late, Harry."
"We can still reach him -" Harry struggled hard and viciously, but Lupin would not let go...
"There's nothing you can do, Harry... nothing... he's gone."
"He hasn't gone!" Harry yelled.
"SIRIUS!" he bellowed. "SIRIUS!"
"He can't come back, Harry," said Lupin, his voice breaking as he struggled to contain Harry.
"He can't come back, because he's d-"
"HE - IS - NOT - DEAD!" roared Harry. "SIRIUS!"
"Harry?"
"Harry... I'b really sorry..." said Neville. His legs were still dancing uncontrollably. "Was dad
man - was Sirius Black a - a friend of yours?"
"Here," said Lupin quietly, and pointing his wand at Neville's legs he said, "Finite." The spell
was lifted: Neville's legs fell back to the floor and remained still. Lupin's face was pale. "Let's -
let's find the others. Where are they all, Neville?"
"Dey're all back dere," said Neville. "A brain addacked Ron bud I dink he's all righd - and
Herbione's unconscious, bud we could feel a bulse"
"Harry - no!" cried Lupin, but Harry had already ripped his arm from Lupin's slackened grip.
"SHE KILLED SIRIUS!" bellowed Harry. "SHE KILLED HIM I'LL KILL HER!"
long colored tentacles, but he shouted, "Wingardium Leviosa!" and they flew off him up into
on the floor, past Ginny, who said, "Harry - what -?", past Ron, who giggled feebly, and
"Where's the exit?" he shouted desperately, as the wall rumbled to a halt again. "Where's the way out?"
"Come out, come out, little Harry!" she called in her mock baby voice, which echoed off the
polished wooden floors. "What did you come after me for, then? I thought you were here to
avenge my dear cousin!"
"I am!" shouted Harry, and a score of ghostly Harrys seemed to chorus I am! I am! I am! all
"Aaaaaah... did you love him, little baby Potter?"
fountain and bellowed, "Crucio!"
"Never used an Unforgivable Curse before, have you, boy?" she yelled. She had abandoned her
baby voice now. "You need to mean them, Potter! You need to really want to cause pain - to
you a lesson -"
Harry was edging around the fountain on the other side when she screamed, "Crucio!" and he
"Potter, you cannot win against me!" she cried.
"I was and am the Dark Lord's most loyal servant. I learned the Dark Arts from him, and I know
spells of such power that you, pathetic little boy, can never hope to compete"
"Stupefy!" yelled Harry. He had edged right around to where the goblin stood beaming up at the
"Protego!"
"Potter, I'm going to give you one chance!" shouted Bellatrix. "Give me the prophecy - roll it out towards me now - and I may spare your life!"
"Well, you're going to have to kill me, because it's gone!" Harry roared and, as he shouted it,
quite unconnected with his own rage. "And he knows!'" said Harry, with a mad laugh to match
Bellatrix's own. "Your dear old mate Voldemort knows it's gone! He's not going to be happy
with you, is he?"
"What? What do you mean?" she cried, and for the first time there was fear in her voice.
"The prophecy smashed when I was trying to get Neville up the steps! What do you think
Voldemort'll say about that, then?"
"LIAR!" she shrieked, but he could hear the terror behind the anger now. "YOU'VE GOT IT,
POTTER, AND YOU WILL GIVE IT TO ME! Accio prophecy! ACCIO PROPHECY!"
"Nothing there!" he shouted. "Nothing to summon! It smashed and nobody heard what it said, tell your boss that!"
"No!" she screamed. "It isn't true, you're lying! MASTER, I TRIED, I TRIED - DO NOT
PUNISH ME"
"Don't waste your breath!" yelled Harry, his eyes screwed up against the pain in his scar, now
more terrible than ever. "He can't hear you from here!"
"Can't I, Potter?" said a high, cold voice.
"So, you smashed my prophecy?" said Voldemort softly, staring at Harry with those pitiless red
eyes. "No, Bella, he is not lying... I see the truth looking at me from within his worthless mind... months of preparation, months of effort... and my Death Eaters have let Harry Potter thwart me again"
"Master, I am sorry I knew not, I was fighting the Animagus Black!" sobbed Bellatrix, flinging
herself down at Voldemort's feet as he paced slowly nearer. "Master, you should know"
"Be quiet, Bella," said Voldemort dangerously. "I shall deal with you in a moment. Do you think
I have entered the Ministry of Magic to hear your sniveling apologies?"
"But Master - he is here - he is below"
"I have nothing more to say to you, Potter," he said quietly. "You have irked me too often, for too long. AVADA KEDAVRA!"
"What -?" cried Voldemort, staring around. And then he breathed, "Dumbledore!"
"It was foolish to come here tonight, Tom," said Dumbledore calmly. "The Aurors are on their
way"
"By which time I shall be gone, and you will be dead!" spat Voldemort. He sent another killing
"You do not seek to kill me, Dumbledore?" called Voldemort, his scarlet eyes narrowed over the
top of the shield. "Above such brutality, are you?"
"We both know that there are other ways of destroying a man, Tom," Dumbledore said calmly,
nothing had happened to interrupt his stroll up the hall. "Merely taking your life would not
satisfy me, I admit"
"There is nothing worse than death, Dumbledore!" snarled Voldemort.
"You are quite wrong," said Dumbledore, still closing in upon Voldemort and speaking as lightly
"Indeed, your failure to understand that there are things much worse than death has always been
your greatest weakness"
"Look out!" Harry yelled.
"MASTER!" screamed Bellatrix.
statue guard, but Dumbledore bellowed: "Stay where you are, Harry!"
"Kill me now, Dumbledore..."
"If death is nothing, Dumbledore, kill the boy..."
"Are you all right, Harry?"
"Yes," said Harry, shaking so violently he could not hold his head up properly. "Yeah, I'm -
where's Voldemort, where - who are all these - what's -"
"He was there!" shouted a scarlet-robed man with a ponytail, who was pointing at a pile of
before. "I saw him, Mr. Fudge, I swear it was You-Know-Who, he grabbed a woman and
Disapparated!"
"I know, Williamson, I know, I saw him too!" gibbered Fudge, who was wearing pajamas under
his pinstriped cloak and was gasping as though he had just run miles. "Merlin's beard - here -
how can this be -?"
"If you proceed downstairs into the Department of Mysteries, Cornelius," said Dumbledore -
amazed; the statues of the elf and goblin applauded and Fudge jumped so much that his slipperclad feet left the floor) - "you will find several escaped Death Eaters contained in the Death Chamber, bound by an Anti-Disapparation Jinx and awaiting your decision as to what to do with them."
"Dumbledore!" gasped Fudge, beside himself with amazement. "You-here-I-I"
clearer that he was in half a mind to cry, "Seize him!"
"Cornelius, I am ready to fight your men - and win, again!" said Dumbledore in a thunderous
voice. "But a few minutes ago you saw proof, with your own eyes, that I have been telling you
twelve months, and it is time - you listened to sense!"
"I - don't - well" blustered Fudge, looking around as though hoping somebody was going to tell
him what to do. When nobody did, he said, "Very well - Dawlish! Williamson! Go down to the
Fountain of Magical Brethren - what happened?" he added in a kind of whimper, staring around
"We can discuss that after I have sent Harry back to Hogwarts," said Dumbledore.
"Harry - Harry Potter?"
"He - here?" said Fudge, goggling at Harry. "Why - what's all this about?"
"I shall explain everything," repeated Dumbledore, "when Harry is back at school."
pointed his wand at it and muttered, "Portus." The head glowed blue and trembled noisily against
"Now see here, Dumbledore!" said Fudge, as Dumbledore picked up the head and walked back to Harry carrying it. "You haven't got authorization for that Portkey! You can't do things like that right in front of the Minister for Magic, you - you"
"You will give the order to remove Dolores Umbridge from Hogwarts," said Dumbledore. "You
return to work. I will give you..." Dumbledore pulled a watch with twelve hands from his
pocket and surveyed it... "half an hour of my time tonight, in which I think we shall be more
contact me at Hogwarts. Letters addressed to the Headmaster will find me."
"I - you"
"Take this Portkey, Harry."
"I shall see you in half an hour," said Dumbledore quietly "One... two... three..."
A picture behind him gave a particularly loud grunting snore, and a cool voice said, "Ah...
Harry Potter..."
"And what brings you here in the early hours of the morning?" said Phineas eventually "This
here? Oh, don't tell me..." He gave another shuddering yawn. "Another message for my
worthless great-great-grandson?"
"I hope this means," said the corpulent, red-nosed wizard who hung on the wall behind the
Headmaster's desk, "that Dumbledore will soon be back among us?"
"Oh good," said the wizard. "It has been very dull without him, very dull indeed."
"Dumbledore thinks very highly of you, as I am sure you know," he said comfortably. "Oh yes.
Holds you in great esteem."
"Thank you," said Dumbledore softly.
"Well, Harry," said Dumbledore, finally turning away from the baby bird, "you will be pleased to hear that none of your fellow students are going to suffer lasting damage from the night's
events."
Harry tried to say, "Good," but no sound came out. It seemed to him that Dumbledore was
"Madam Pomfrey is patching everybody up," said Dumbledore. "Nymphadora Tonks may need
to spend a little time in St. Mungo's, but it seems she will make a full recovery."
"I know how you're feeling, Harry," said Dumbledore very quietly.
"No, you don't," said Harry, and his voice was suddenly loud and strong; white-hot anger leapt
"You see, Dumbledore?" said Phineas Nigellus slyly "Never try to understand the students. They
own -"
"That's enough, Phineas," said Dumbledore.
"There is no shame in what you are feeling, Harry," said Dumbledore's voice. "On the contrary... the fact that you can feel pain like this is your greatest strength."
"My greatest strength, is it?" said Harry, his voice shaking as he stared out at the Quidditch
stadium, no longer seeing it. "You haven't got a clue... you don't know..."
"What don't I know?" asked Dumbledore calmly.
"I don't want to talk about how I feel, all right?"
"Harry, suffering like this proves you are still a man! This pain is part of being human"
"THEN - I - DON'T - WANT - TO - BE - HUMAN!" Harry roared, and he seized the delicate
and fright, and the portrait of Armando Dippet said, "Really!"
"I DON'T CARE!" Harry yelled at them, snatching up a lunascope and throwing it into the
fireplace. "I'VE HAD ENOUGH, I'VE SEEN ENOUGH, I WANT OUT, I WANT IT TO END,
I DON'T CARE ANY MORE"
"You do care," said Dumbledore. He had not flinched or made a single move to stop Harry
demolishing his office. His expression was calm, almost detached. "You care so much you feel as though you will bleed to death with the pain of it."
"I - DON'T!" Harry screamed, so loudly that he felt his throat might tear, and for a second he
"Oh, yes, you do," said Dumbledore, still more calmly. "You have now lost your mother, your
father, and the closest thing to a parent you have ever known. Of course you care."
"YOU DON'T KNOW HOW I FEEL!" Harry roared. "YOU - STANDING THERE - YOU"
But the door would not open. Harry turned back to Dumbledore. "Let me out," he said. He was
"No," said Dumbledore, simply. For a few seconds they stared at each other.
"Let me out," Harry said again.
"No," Dumbledore repeated.
"If you don't - if you keep me in here - if you don 't let me"
"By all means continue destroying my possessions," said Dumbledore serenely. "I daresay I have
too many."
"Let me out," Harry said yet again, in a voice that was cold and almost as calm as
"Not until I have had my say," said Dumbledore.
"Do you - do you think I want to - do you think I give a - I DON'T CARE WHAT YOU'VE
GOT TO SAY!" Harry roared. "I don't want to hear anything you've got to say!"
"You will," said Dumbledore steadily. "Because you are not nearly as angry with me as you
thoroughly earned it."
"What are you talking -?"
"It is my fault that Sirius died," said Dumbledore clearly. "Or should I say, almost entirely my
me, and with me alone."
"Please sit down," said Dumbledore. It was not an order, it was a request.
"Am I to understand," said Phineas Nigellus slowly from Harry's left, "that my great-great-grandson - the last of the Blacks - is dead?"
"Yes, Phineas," said Dumbledore.
"I don't believe it," said Phineas brusquely.
"Harry, I owe you an explanation," said Dumbledore. "An explanation of an old man's mistakes.
forget what it was to be young... and I seem to have forgotten, lately..."
"I guessed, fifteen years ago," said Dumbledore, "when I saw the scar on your forehead, what it
Voldemort."
"You've told me this before, Professor," said Harry bluntly. He did not care about being rude. He
"Yes," said Dumbledore apologetically. "Yes, but you see - it is necessary to start with your scar. For it became apparent, shortly after you rejoined the magical world, that I was correct, and that your scar was giving you warnings when Voldemort was close to you, or else feeling powerful emotion."
"I know," said Harry wearily.
"And this ability of yours - to detect Voldemort's presence, even when he is disguised, and to
since Voldemort returned to his own body and his full powers."
"More recently" said Dumbledore, "I became concerned that Voldemort might realize that this
witnessed the attack on Mr. Weasley"
"Yeah, Snape told me," Harry muttered.
"Professor Snape, Harry" Dumbledore corrected him quietly. "But did you not wonder why it was not I who explained this to you? Why I did not teach you Occlumency? Why I had not so much as looked at you for months?"
"Yeah," Harry mumbled. "Yeah, I wondered."
"You see," Dumbledore continued, "I believed it could not be long before Voldemort attempted
of him stir behind your eyes..."
"Voldemort's aim in possessing you, as he demonstrated tonight, would not have been my
distancing myself from you, to protect you, Harry. An old man's mistake..."
"Sirius told me you felt Voldemort awake inside you the very night that you had the vision of
arranged Occlumency lessons with Professor Snape."
"Professor Snape discovered," Dumbledore resumed, " that you had been dreaming about the door to the Department of Mysteries for months. Voldemort, of course, had been obsessed with the possibility of hearing the prophecy ever since he regained his body; and as he dwelled on the
"And then you saw Rockwood, who worked in the Department of Mysteries before his arrest,
It became a matter of even greater urgency that you should master Occlumency"
"But I didn't," muttered Harry. He said it aloud to try and ease the dead weight of guilt inside
him: a confession must surely relieve some of the terrible pressure squeezing his heart. "I didn't
Sirius wouldn't"
"I tried to check he'd really taken Sirius, I went to Umbridge's office, I spoke to Kreacher in the
fire and he said Sirius wasn't there, he said he'd gone!"
"Kreacher lied," said Dumbledore calmly. "You are not his master, he could lie to you without
even needing to punish himself. Kreacher intended you to go to the Ministry of Magic."
"He - he sent me on purpose?"
"Oh yes. Kreacher, I am afraid, has been serving more than one master for months."
"How?" said Harry blankly. "He hasn't been out of Grimmauld Place for years."
"Kreacher seized his opportunity shortly before Christmas," said Dumbledore, "when Sirius,
apparently, shouted at him to 'get out'. He took Sirius at his word, and interpreted this as an order to leave the house. He went to the only Black family member for whom he had any respect left... Black's cousin Narcissa, sister of Bellatrix and wife of Lucius Malfoy"
"How do you know all this?" Harry said. His heart was beating very fast. He felt sick. He
"Kreacher told me last night," said Dumbledore. "You see, when you gave Professor Snape that
"When, however, you did not return from your trip into the Forest with Dolores Umbridge,
He alerted certain Order members at once."
Dumbledore heaved a great sigh and continued, "Alastor Moody, Nymphadora Tonks, Kingsley
"But Sirius did not wish to remain behind while the others went to search for you. He delegated
laughing fit to burst - where Sirius had gone."
"He was laughing?" said Harry in a hollow voice.
"Oh, yes," said Dumbledore. "You see, Kreacher was not able to betray us totally. He is not
yet must have seemed much too trivial for Sirius to think of banning him from repeating it."
"Like what?" said Harry.
"Like the fact that the person Sirius cared most about in the world was you," said Dumbledore
quietly. "Like the fact that you were coming to regard Sirius as a mixture of father and brother.
to any lengths to rescue was Sirius Black."
"So... when I asked Kreacher if Sirius was there last night..."
"The Malfoys - undoubtedly on Voldemort's instructions - had told him he must find a way of
your appearance in the fire, Sirius was upstairs tending to him."
"And Kreacher told you all this... and laughed?" he croaked.
"He did not wish to tell me," said Dumbledore. "But I am a sufficiently accomplished Legilimens myself to know when I am being lied to and I - persuaded him - to tell me the full story, before I left for the Department of Mysteries."
"And," whispered Harry, his hands curled in cold fists on his knees, "and Hermione kept telling
us to be nice to him"
"She was quite right, Harry," said Dumbledore. "I warned Sirius when we adopted twelve
seriously, or that he ever saw Kreacher as a being with feelings as acute as a human's"
"Don't you blame - don't you - talk - about Sirius like -" Harry's breath was constricted, he could not get the words out properly; but the rage that had subsided briefly flared in him again: he would not let Dumbledore criticize Sirius. "Kreacher's a lying - foul - he deserved -"
"Kreacher is what he has been made by wizards, Harry" said Dumbledore. "Yes, he is to be
make Kreacher's lot easier"
"DON'T TALK ABOUT SIRIUS LIKE THAT!" Harry yelled.
"What about Snape?" Harry spat. "You're not talking about him, are you? When I told him
Voldemort had Sirius he just sneered at me as usual -"
"Harry, you know Professor Snape had no choice but to pretend not to take you seriously in front
of Dolores Umbridge," said Dumbledore steadily, "but as I have explained, he informed the
Veritaserum when she was attempting to force you to tell her Sirius's whereabouts."
"Snape - Snape g - goaded Sirius about staying in the house - he made out Sirius was a coward"
"Sirius was much too old and clever to have allowed such feeble taunts to hurt him," said
"Snape stopped giving me Occlumency lessons!" Harry snarled. "He threw me out of his office!"
"I am aware of it," said Dumbledore heavily "I have already said that it was a mistake for me not
than to open your mind even further to Voldemort while in my presence -"
"Snape made it worse, my scar always hurt worse after lessons with him" Harry remembered
Ron's thoughts on the subject and plunged on "- how do you know he wasn't trying to soften me
up for Voldemort, make it easier for him to get inside my -"
"I trust Severus Snape," said Dumbledore simply "But I forgot - another old man's mistake - that
feelings about your father - I was wrong."
"But that's okay, is it?" yelled Harry, ignoring the scandalized faces and disapproving mutterings
of the portraits on the walls. "It's okay for Snape to hate my dad, but it's not okay for Sirius to hate Kreacher?"
"Sirius did not hate Kreacher," said Dumbledore. "He regarded him as a servant unworthy of
our fellows for too long, and we are now reaping our reward."
"SO SIRIUS DESERVED WHAT HE GOT, DID HE?" Harry yelled.
"I did not say that, nor will you ever hear me say it," Dumbledore replied quietly. "Sirius was not a cruel man, he was kind to house-elves in general. He had no love for Kreacher, because
Kreacher was a living reminder of the home Sirius had hated."
"Yeah, he did hate it!" said Harry, his voice cracking, turning his back on Dumbledore and
him as he walked, without realizing what he was doing, without seeing the office at all. "You
made him stay shut up in that house and he hated it, that's why he wanted to get out last night"
"I was trying to keep Sirius alive," said Dumbledore quietly
"People don't like being locked up!" Harry said furiously, rounding on him. "You did it to me all
last summer"
"It is time," he said, "for me to tell you what I should have told you five years ago, Harry. Please sit down. I am going to tell you everything. I ask only a little patience. You will have your
chance to rage at me - to do whatever you like - when I have finished. I will not stop you."
Harry and said, "Five years ago you arrived at Hogwarts, Harry, safe and whole, as I had planned
your aunt and uncle's doorstep. I knew I was condemning you to ten dark and difficult years."
"You might ask - and with good reason - why it had to be so. Why could some wizarding family
"My answer is that my priority was to keep you alive. You were in more danger than perhaps
"I knew that Voldemort's knowledge of magic is perhaps more extensive than any wizard alive. I knew that even my most complex and powerful protective spells and charms were unlikely to be
"But I knew, too, where Voldemort was weak. And so I made my decision. You would be
sister, her only remaining relative."
"She doesn't love me," said Harry at once. "She doesn't give a damn -"
"But she took you," Dumbledore cut across him. "She may have taken you grudgingly, furiously,
you. Your mother's sacrifice made the bond of blood the strongest shield I could give you."
"I still don't."
"While you can still call home the place where your mother's blood dwells, there you cannot be
may well have kept you alive for the past fifteen years."
"Wait," said Harry. "Wait a moment."
"You sent that Howler. You told her to remember - it was your voice -"
"I thought," said Dumbledore, inclining his head slightly, "that she might need reminding of the
dangers of having you as a surrogate son."
"It did," said Harry quietly. "Well - my uncle more than her. He wanted to chuck me out, but after the Howler came she - she said I had to stay"
He stared at the floor for a moment, then said, "But what's this got to do with - "
"Five years ago, then," continued Dumbledore, as though he had not paused in his story, "you
"And then... well, you will remember the events of your first year at Hogwarts quite as clearly
"Yet there was a flaw in this wonderful plan of mine," said Dumbledore. "An obvious flaw that I
wing, weak from your struggle with Voldemort."
"I don't understand what you're saying," said Harry.
"Don't you remember asking me, as you lay in the hospital wing, why Voldemort had tried to kill you when you were a baby?"
"Ought I to have told you then?"
"You do not see the flaw in the plan yet? No... perhaps not. Well, as you know, I decided not to
"I should have recognized the danger signs then. I should have asked myself why I did not feel
"And so we entered your second year at Hogwarts. And once again you met challenges even
"Well, it seemed to me that twelve was, after all, hardly better than eleven to receive such
"Do you see, Harry? Do you see the flaw in my brilliant plan now? I had fallen into the trap I had foreseen, that I had told myself I could avoid, that I must avoid."
"I don't -"
"I cared about you too much," said Dumbledore simply. "I cared more for your happiness than
"Is there a Defense? I defy anyone who has watched you as I have - and I have watched you more closely than you can have imagined - not to want to save you more pain than you had already suffered. What did I care if numbers of nameless and faceless people and creatures were
"We entered your third year. I watched from afar as you struggled to repel Dementors, as you
"But you came out of the maze last year, having watched Cedric Diggory die, having escaped
myself to add another - the greatest one of all."
"I still don't understand."
"Voldemort tried to kill you when you were a child because of a prophecy made shortly before
you."
"The prophecy's smashed," Harry said blankly. "I was pulling Neville up those benches in the -
the room where the archway was, and I ripped his robes and it fell..."
"The thing that smashed was merely the record of the prophecy kept by the Department of
it perfectly"
"Who heard it?" asked Harry, though he thought he knew the answer already
"I did," said Dumbledore. "On a cold, wet night sixteen years ago, in a room above the bar at the
post. I turned to leave."
"The one with the power to vanquish the - Dark Lord approaches... born to those who have thrice defied him, born as the seventh month dies... and the Dark Lord will mark him as his equal, but he will have power the Dark Lord knows not... and either must die at the hand of the other for neither can live while the other survives... the one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord will be born as the seventh month dies..."
"Professor Dumbledore?" Harry said very quietly, for Dumbledore, still staring at the Pensieve,
seemed completely lost in thought. "It... did that mean... what did that mean?"
"It meant," said Dumbledore, "that the person who has the only chance of conquering Lord
born to parents who had already defied Voldemort three times."
"It means - me?"
"The odd thing, Harry," he said softly, "is that it may not have meant you at all. Sibyll's prophecy could have applied to two wizard boys, both born at the end of July that year, both of whom had parents in the Order of the Phoenix, both sets of parents having narrowly escaped Voldemort three times. One, of course, was you. The other was Neville Longbottom."
"But then... but then, why was it my name on the prophecy and not Neville's?"
"The official record was re-labeled after Voldemort's attack on you as a child," said
Dumbledore. "It seemed plain to the keeper of the Hall of Prophecy that Voldemort could only
have tried to kill you because he knew you to be the one to whom Sibyll was referring."
"Then - it might not be me?" said Harry
"I am afraid," said Dumbledore slowly, looking as though every word cost him a great effort,
"that there is no doubt that it is you."
"But you said - Neville was born at the end of July, too - and his mum and dad -"
"You are forgetting the next part of the prophecy, the final identifying feature of the boy who
Harry. He chose you, not Neville. He gave you the scar that has proved both blessing and curse."
"But he might have chosen wrong!" said Harry. "He might have marked the wrong person!"
"He chose the boy he thought most likely to be a danger to him," said Dumbledore. "And notice
something that neither your parents, nor Neville's parents, ever achieved."
"Why did he do it, then?" said Harry, who felt numb and cold. "Why did he try and kill me as a
older and tried to kill whoever it was then -"
"That might, indeed, have been the more practical course," said Dumbledore, "except that
into the prophecy and thrown from the building."
"So he only heard -?"
"He heard only the beginning, the part foretelling the birth of a boy in July to parents who had
know that you would have power the Dark Lord knows not-"
"But I don't!" said Harry, in a strangled voice. "I haven't any powers he hasn't got, I couldn't
fight the way he did tonight, I can't possess people or - or kill them -"
"There is a room in the Department of Mysteries," interrupted Dumbledore, "that is kept locked at all times. It contains a force that is at once more wonderful and more terrible than death, than
mind. It was your heart that saved you."
much about the answer, "The end of the prophecy... it was something about neither... can live..."
"... while the other survives," said Dumbledore.
"So," said Harry, dredging up the words from what felt like a deep well of despair inside him,
"so does that mean that... that one of us has got to kill the other one... in the end?"
"Yes," said Dumbledore.
"I feel I owe you another explanation, Harry," said Dumbledore hesitantly. "You may, perhaps,
had enough responsibility to be going on with."
"In a brief statement on Friday night, Minister for Magic Cornelius Fudge confirmed that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named has returned to this country and is active once more.
"'It is with great regret that I must confirm that t he wizard styling himself Lord - well, you know
"'We urge the magical population to remain vigilant. The Ministry is currently publishing guides
"Details of the events that led to the Ministry turnaround are still hazy, though it is believed that
"Albus Dumbledore, newly reinstated Headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and
followers once more for afresh attempt to seize power. Meanwhile, the 'Boy Who Lived' -"
"There you are, Harry, I knew they'd drag you into it somehow," said Hermione, looking over the top of the paper at him.
"He's the 'boy who lived' again now, though, isn't he?" said Ron darkly. "Not such a deluded
show-off any more, eh?"
"Yes, they're very complimentary about you now, Harry," said Hermione, scanning down the
article. "'A lone voice of truth... perceived as unbalanced, yet never wavered in his story... forced to bear ridicule and slander... ' Hmmm," she said, frowning, "I notice they don't mention the fact that it was them doing all the ridiculing and slandering in the Prophet..."
"You-Know-Who's Last Attempt to Take Over, pages two to four, What the Ministry Should
Exclusive Interview with Harry Potter, page nine... Well," said Hermione, folding up the
newspaper and throwing it aside, "it's certainly given them lots to write about. And that interview with Harry isn't exclusive, it's the one that was in The Quibbler months ago..."
"Daddy sold it to them," said Luna vaguely, turning a page of The Quibbler. "He got a very good
catch a Crumple-Horned Snorkack."
Hermione seemed to struggle with herself for a moment, then said, "That sounds lovely"
"So, anyway," said Hermione, sitting up a little straighter and wincing again, "what's going on in school?"
"Well, Flitwick's got rid of Fred and George's swamp," said Ginny, "he did it in about three
seconds. But he left a tiny patch under the window and he's roped it off"
"Why?" said Hermione, looking startled.
"Oh, he just says it was a really good bit of magic," said Ginny, shrugging.
"I think he left it as a monument to Fred and George," said Ron, through a mouthful of chocolate.
"They sent me all these, you know," he told Harry, pointing at the small mountain of Frogs beside him. "Must be doing all right out of that joke shop, eh?"
Hermione looked rather disapproving and asked, "So has all the trouble stopped now
Dumbledore's back?"
"Yes," said Neville, "everything's settled right back to normal."
"I s'pose Filch is happy, is he?" asked Ron, propping a Chocolate Frog Card featuring
"Not at all," said Ginny "He's really, really miserable, actually..." She lowered her voice to a
whisper. "He keeps saying Umbridge was the best thing that ever happened to Hogwarts..."
"Madam Pomfrey says she's just in shock," whispered Hermione.
"Sulking, more like," said Ginny
"Yeah, she shows signs of life if you do this," said Ron, and with his tongue he made soft clipclopping noises. Umbridge sat bolt upright, looking around wildly.
"Anything wrong, Professor?" called Madam Pomfrey, poking her head around her office door.
"No... no..." said Umbridge, sinking back into her pillows. "No, I must have been dreaming..."
"Speaking of centaurs," said Hermione, when she had recovered a little, "who's Divination teacher now? Is Firenze staying?"
"He's got to," said Harry, "the other centaurs won't take him back, will they?"
"It looks like he and Trelawney are both going to teach," said Ginny
"Bet Dumbledore wishes he could've got rid of Trelawney for good," said Ron, now munching on his fourteenth Frog. "Mind you, the whole subject's useless if you ask me, Firenze isn't a lot
better..."
"How can you say that?" Hermione demanded. "After we've just found out that there are real
prophecies?"
"It is a pity it broke," said Hermione quietly, shaking her head.
"Yeah, it is," said Ron. "Still, at least You-Know-Who never found out what was in it either -
where are you going?" he added, looking both surprised and disappointed as Harry stood up.
"Er - Hagrid's," said Harry. "You know, he just got back and I promised I'd go down and see him and tell him how you two are."
"Oh, all right then," said Ron grumpily, looking out of the dormitory window at the patch of
bright blue sky beyond. "Wish we could come."
"Say hello to him for us!" called Hermione, as Harry proceeded down the ward. "And ask him
what's happening about... about his little friend!"
at Harry and said in a low voice, "You're dead, Potter."
"Funny" he said, "you'd think I'd have stopped walking around..."
"You're going to pay," said Malfoy in a voice barely louder than a whisper. "I'm going to make
you pay for what you've done to my father..."
"Well, I'm terrified now," said Harry sarcastically. "I s'pose Lord Voldemort's just a warm-up act compared to you three - what's the matter?" he added, for Malfoy, Crabbe and Goyle had all
looked stricken at the sound of the name. "He's your dad's mate, isn't he? Not scared of him,
are you?"
"You think you're such a big man, Potter," said Malfoy, advancing now, Crabbe and Goyle
flanking him. "You wait. I'll have you. You can't land my father in prison"
"I thought I just had," said Harry.
"The Dementors have left Azkaban," said Malfoy quietly. "Dad and the others'll be out in no
time..."
"Yeah, I expect they will," said Harry "Still, at least everyone knows what scumbags they are
now"
"Potter!"
"What are you doing, Potter?" said Snape, as coldly as ever, as he strode over to the four of them.
"I'm trying to decide what curse to use on Malfoy, sir," said Harry fiercely.
"Put that wand away at once," he said curtly. "Ten points from Gryff-"
"Ah. I see there are no longer any points left in the Gryffindor hour-glass to take away. In that
case, Potter, we will simply have to -"
"Add some more?"
"Professor McGonagall!" said Snape, striding forwards. "Out of St. Mungo's, I see!"
"Yes, Professor Snape," said Professor McGonagall, shrugging off her traveling cloak, "I'm quite as good as new. You two - Crabbe - Goyle"
"Here," said Professor McGonagall, thrusting her carpetbag into Crabbe's chest and her cloak into Goyle's; "take these up to my office for me."
"Right then," said Professor McGonagall, looking up at the hourglasses on the wall. "Well, I think Potter and his friends ought to have fifty points apiece for alerting the world to the return of You-Know-Who! What say you, Professor Snape?"
"What?" snapped Snape, though Harry knew he had heard perfectly well. "Oh - well - I
suppose..."
"So that's fifty each for Potter, the two Weasleys, Longbottom and Miss Granger," said Professor McGonagall, and a shower of rubies fell down into the bottom bulb of Gryffindor's hour-glass as she spoke. "Oh - and fifty for Miss Lovegood, I suppose," she added, and a number of sapphires fell into Ravenclaw's glass. "Now, you wanted to take ten from Mr. Potter, I think, Professor Snape - so there we are..."
"Well, Potter, Malfoy I think you ought to be outside on a glorious day like this," Professor
"All righ', Harry!" he said, beaming, when Harry approached the fence. "Come in, come in, we'll have a cup o' dandelion juice..."
"How's things?" Hagrid asked him, as they settled d own at his wooden table with a glass apiece
of iced juice. "Yeh - er - feelin' all righ', are yeh?"
"I'm fine," Harry said quickly, because he could no t bear to discuss the thing that he knew was in Hagrid's mind. "So, where're you been?"
"Bin hidin' out in the mountains," said Hagrid. "Up in a cave, like Sirius did when he -"
"Anyway, back now," he said feebly.
"You - you look better," said Harry, who was determined to keep the conversation moving away
"Wha'?" said Hagrid, raising a massive hand and feeling his face. "Oh - oh yeah. Well, Grawpy's loads better behaved now, loads. Seemed right pleased ter see me when I got back, ter tell yeh the truth. He's a good lad, really... I've bin thinkin' abou' tryin' ter find him a lady friend, actually..."
"Ev'ryone knows yeh've bin tellin' the truth now, Harry," said Hagrid softly and unexpectedly. He was watching Harry closely. "Tha's gotta be better, hasn' it?"
"Look..." Hagrid leaned towards him across the table, "I knew Sirius longer 'n yeh did... he died in battle, an' tha's the way he'd've wanted ter go -"
"He didn't want to go at all!" said Harry angrily.
"Nah, I don' reckon he did," he said quietly. "But s till, Harry... he was never one ter sit aroun' at home an' let other people do the fightin'. He couldn've lived with himself if he hadn' gone ter
help -"
"I've got to go and visit Ron and Hermione in the hospital wing," he said mechanically.
"Oh," said Hagrid, looking rather upset. "Oh... all righ' then, Harry... take care o' yerself then, an' drop back in if yeh've got a -"
"Yeah... right..."
"Just do it tomorrow!" said Ron, who was waiting by the door of their dormitory. "Come on, I'm
starving."
"I won't be long... look, you go ahead..."
clearly, "Sirius."
"Sirius Black!"
along the corridor, ignoring the Fat Lady, who called after him: "The feast is about to start, you
know, you're cutting it very fine!"
"Hey - hey Nick! NICK!"
"Good evening," he said, withdrawing the rest of his body from the solid stone and smiling at
Harry "I am not the only one who is late, then? Though," he sighed, "in a rather different sense, of course..."
"Nick, can I ask you something?"
"Er - now, Harry?" said Nick, looking discomfited. "Can't it wait until after the feast?"
"No - Nick - please," said Harry, "I really need to talk to you. Can we go in here?"
"Oh, very well," he said, looking resigned. "I can't pretend I haven't been expecting it."
"Expecting what?" Harry asked, as he closed the door.
"You to come and find me," said Nick, now gliding over to the window and looking out at the
darkening grounds. "It happens, sometimes... when somebody has suffered a... loss."
"Well," said Harry, refusing to be deflected. "You were right, I've - I've come to find you."
"It's -" said Harry, who was finding this more awkward than he had anticipated, "it's just - you're dead. But you're still here, aren't you?"
"That's right, isn't it?" Harry urged him. "You died, but I'm talking to you... you can walk around Hogwarts and everything, can't you?"
"Yes," said Nearly Headless Nick quietly, "I walk and talk, yes."
"So, you came back, didn't you?" said Harry urgently. "People can come back, right? As ghosts.
They don't have to disappear completely. Well?" he added impatiently, when Nick continued to
Nearly Headless Nick hesitated, then said, "Not everyone can come back as a ghost."
"What d'you mean?" said Harry quickly
"Only... only wizards."
"Oh," said Harry, and he almost laughed with relief. "Well, that's okay then, the person I'm asking about is a wizard. So he can come back, right?"
"He won't come back."
"Who?"
"Sirius Black," said Nick.
"But you did!" said Harry angrily. "You came back - you're dead and you didn't disappear -"
"Wizards can leave an imprint of themselves upon the earth, to walk palely where their living
selves once trod," said Nick miserably. "But very few wizards choose that path."
"Why not?" said Harry. "Anyway - it doesn't matter - Sirius won't care if it's unusual, he'll come back, I know he will!"
"He will not come back," repeated Nick. "He will have... gone on."
"What d'you mean, 'gone on'?" said Harry quickly "Gone on where? Listen - what happens when you die, anyway? Where do you go? Why doesn't everyone come back? Why isn't this place full of ghosts? Why -?"
"I cannot answer," said Nick.
"You're dead, aren't you?" said Harry exasperatedly. "Who can answer better than you?"
"I was afraid of death," said Nick softly. "I chose to remain behind. I sometimes wonder whether I oughtn't to have... well, that is neither here nor there... in fact, I am neither here nor there..."
He gave a small sad chuckle. "I know nothing of the secrets of death, Harry, for I chose my feeble imitation of life instead. I believe learned wizards study the matter in the Department of
Mysteries -"
"Don't talk to me about that place!" said Harry fiercely.
"I am sorry not to have been more help," said Nick gently "Well... well, do excuse me... the
feast, you know..."
"Hello," said Luna vaguely, glancing around at him as she stepped back from the notice.
"How come you're not at the feast?" Harry asked.
"Well, I've lost most of my possessions," said Luna serenely. "People take them and hide them,
you know. But as it's the last night, I really do need them back, so I've been putting up signs."
"How come people hide your stuff?" he asked her, frowning.
"Oh... well..." she shrugged. "I think they think I'm a bit odd, you know. Some people call me
'Loony' Lovegood, actually."
"That's no reason for them to take your things," he said flatly. "D'you want help finding them?"
"Oh, no," she said, smiling at him. "They'll come back, they always do in the end. It was just that I wanted to pack tonight. Anyway... why aren't you at the feast?"
Harry shrugged. "Just didn't feel like it."
"No," said Luna, observing him with those oddly misty, protuberant eyes. "I don't suppose you
do. That man the Death Eaters killed was your godfather, wasn't he? Ginny told me."
"Have you..." he began. "I mean, who... has anyone you known ever died?"
"Yes," said Luna simply, "my mother. She was a quite extraordinary witch, you know, but she did like to experiment and one of her spells went rather badly wrong one day. I was nine."
"I'm sorry" Harry mumbled.
"Yes, it was rather horrible," said Luna conversationally. "I still feel very sad about it sometimes. But I've still got Dad. And anyway, it's not as though I'll never see Mum again, is it?"
"Er - isn't it?" said Harry uncertainly.
"Oh, come on. You heard them, just behind the veil, didn't you?"
"You mean..."
"In that room with the archway. They were just lurking out of sight, that's all. You heard them."
"Are you sure you don't want me to help you look for your stuff?" he said.
"Oh, no," said Luna. "No, I think I'll just go down and have some pudding and wait for it all to
turn up... it always does in the end... well, have a nice holiday Harry"
"Yeah... yeah, you too."
"I must say, I'm looking forward to seeing Malfoy's mother's face when he gets off the train," said Ernie, with some satisfaction, as he watched Malfoy squirm above him. Ernie had never quite got over the indignity of Malfoy docking points from Hufflepuff during his brief spell as a member of the Inquisitorial Squad.
"Goyle's mum'll be really pleased, though," said Ron, who had come to investigate the source of the commotion. "He's loads better looking now... anyway, Harry, the food trolley's just stopped if you want anything..."
"It hasn't really started yet," sighed Hermione gloomily, folding up the newspaper again. "But it
won't be long now..."
"Hey, Harry" said Ron softly, nodding towards the glass window on to the corridor.
"What's - er - going on with you and her, anyway?" Ron asked quietly
"Nothing," said Harry truthfully.
"I - er - heard she's going out with someone else now," said Hermione tentatively.
"You're well out of it, mate," said Ron forcefully. "I mean, she's quite good-looking and all that,
but you want someone a bit more cheerful."
"She's probably cheerful enough with someone else," said Harry, shrugging.
"Who's she with now, anyway?" Ron asked Hermione, but it was Ginny who answered.
"Michael Corner," she said.
"Michael - but -" said Ron, craning around in hiss eat to stare at her. "But you were going out
with him!"
"Not any more," said Ginny resolutely. "He didn't like Gryffindor beating Ravenclaw at
Quidditch, and got really sulky, so I ditched him and he ran off to comfort Cho instead." She
"Well, I always thought he was a bit of an idiot," he said, prodding his queen forwards towards
Harry's quivering castle. "Good for you. Just choose someone - better - next time."
"Well, I've chosen Dean Thomas, would you say he's better?" asked Ginny vaguely.
"WHAT?" shouted Ron, upending the chessboard: Crookshanks went plunging after the pieces
"Ron, Ginny!" called Mrs. Weasley, hurrying forwards and hugging her children tightly "Oh, and Harry dear - how are you?"
"Fine," lied Harry, as she pulled him into a tight embrace. Over her shoulder he saw Ron goggling at the twins' new clothes.
"What are they supposed to be?" he asked, pointing at the jackets.
"Finest dragonskin, little bro'," said Fred, giving his zip a little tweak. "Business is booming and
we thought we'd treat ourselves."
"Hello, Harry" said Lupin, as Mrs. Weasley let go of Harry and turned to greet Hermione.
"Hi," said Harry "I didn't expect... what are you all doing here?"
"Well," said Lupin with a slight smile, "we thought we might have a little chat with your aunt and uncle before letting them take you home."
"I dunno if that's a good idea," said Harry at once.
"Oh, I think it is," growled Moody, who had limped a little closer. "That'll be them, will it,
Potter?"
"Ah, Harry" said Mr. Weasley, turning from Hermione 's parents, who he had just greeted
enthusiastically, and who were now taking it in turns to hug Hermione. "Well - shall we do it,
then?"
"Yeah, I reckon so, Arthur," said Moody.
"Good afternoon," said Mr. Weasley pleasantly to Uncle Vernon as he came to a halt right in front of him. "You might remember me, my name's Arthur Weasley"
"We thought we'd just have a few words with you about Harry," said Mr. Weasley, still smiling.
"Yeah," growled Moody. "About how he's treated when he's at your place."
"I am not aware that it is any of your business what goes on in my house -"
"I expect what you're not aware of would fill several books, Dursley," growled Moody.
"Anyway, that's not the point," interjected Tonks, whose pink hair seemed to offend Aunt Petunia more than all the rest put together, for she closed her eyes rather than look at her. "The point is, if we find out you've been horrible to Harry -"
"- And make no mistake, we'll hear about it," added Lupin pleasantly.
"Yes," said Mr. Weasley, "even if you won't let Harry use the fellytone -"
"Telephone," whispered Hermione.
"- Yeah, if we get any hint that Potter's been mistreated in any way, you'll have us to answer to,"
"Are you threatening me, sir?" he said, so loudly t hat passers-by actually turned to stare.
"Yes, I am," said Mad-Eye, who seemed rather pleased that Uncle Vernon had grasped this fact
"And do I look like the kind of man who can be intimidated?" barked Uncle Vernon.
"Well..." said Moody, pushing back his bowler hat to reveal his sinisterly revolving magical eye.
Uncle Vernon leapt backwards in horror and collided painfully with a luggage trolley. "Yes, I'd
have to say you do, Dursley"
"So, Potter... give us a shout if you need us. If we don't hear from you for three days in a row,
we'll send someone along..."
"Bye, then, Potter," said Moody, grasping Harry's shoulder for a moment with a gnarled hand.
"Take care, Harry," said Lupin quietly. "Keep in touch."
"Harry, we'll have you away from there as soon as we can," Mrs. Weasley whispered, hugging
"We'll see you soon, mate," said Ron anxiously, shaking Harry's hand.
"Really soon, Harry" said Hermione earnestly. "We promise."